## CHAPTER XIX
## Philosophy
1
This philosophy also has a history. Before examining this, it might be well to take stock, since we have been through a number of histories which are intricated into each other.

In fact there is only one history, that of Spirit, whose different aspects we have been following in examining the development of political society, art, religion and now philosophy. Any given stage in history is a totality in which the same spirit manifests itself in all these different modes. All the different forms (Gestaltungen) of an age belong together.

The essential category is that of unity, the inner connection of all these diverse forms. We must firmly grasp this, that there is only one spirit, one principle, which leaves its impress on the political situation as well as manifesting itself in religion, art, ethics, sociability, commerce and industry, so that these different forms are only branches of one trunk.

(GPhil, 148)

Philosophy is one side of this. It is a reflection of the spirit of the times. It cannot thus stand over its time. Or rather, in a sense it does, since philosophy always has the same basic insight.1 So that it can sometimes be thought afterwards to have shown the world the way it had to go – as Neo-Platonic philosophy foreshadowed the reconciliation which Christianity would achieve (GPhil, 150). But on its own level of development, rather than seen in the light of the eternal truths it points to, a philosophy cannot step over its time.

philosophy is at first only the thought of the substantial reality of its time; it cannot stand over its time, but only produces in thought the content of this time.(GPhil, 150)

But the philosophy of an age is not entirely contemporaneous with its other manifestations. ‘Within a given form of Spirit philosophy comes on the scene at a determined time, not simultaneously with the other aspects’ (loc. cit.). For thought is reflective. It stands over against and negates the immediate stream of life. ‘Thus thought is the negation of the natural mode of life’ (op. cit., 151). Thus philosophy does not tend to arise when an age is in its prime, in the bloom of youth, but rather when it has already started to grow old. And by taking a reflective stance philosophy weakens the immediacy of commitment and helps along the process of decline (Verderben).

Thus if philosophy is to arise among a people, a breach must have been made in the world of reality. Philosophy is then the reconciliation to the ruin which thought itself initiated; this reconciliation occurs in the ideal world, the world of the spirit, to which man flees when the earthly world no longer satisfies him. Philosophy begins with the decline of a real world. When philosophy comes on the scene and – painting grey in grey – deploys its abstractions, the fresh colour of youth and vitality is already past. (GPhil, 151)2

We see an example of this in the Ionians who start to philosophize when their states fall under Persian rule. The great age of Greek philosophy comes with the decline of the polis. The Romans properly come to philosophy with the demise of the Republic, and the greatest philosophical achievement of the Hellenistic and Roman periods, Neo-Platonism, comes when the Empire is on the way down (op. cit., 152).

Philosophy comes after life, and this seems to be true of the definitive philosophy as well, this reconciliation in thought of finite with infinite spirit, which as we saw in the last chapter, presupposes and builds on a real reconciliation in life. Although Hegel seems to have thought that the maturing of philosophy in this case would not be a signal of decline. Rather the new age still had a great deal – perhaps an endless task – to accomplish in order to work out its principle. Philosophy represents decline in earlier ages because their principles when adequately understood cannot be sustained.

But does this mean that we can attribute the famous Marxist slogan, that being precedes consciousness, to Hegel? Not at all. For Hegel reality cannot be divided up in this way. Any advance in men’s form of life involves changes in their will, feelings, passions, their consciousness of themselves and their world. For the practices and institutions constitutive of a given way of life are bound up, as we saw in Chapter XIV, with certain ideas about man and his relation to society. Transformation in man’s being and transformations in his consciousness are parts of a single totality, and cannot be put in a causal relation the way a certain oversimplified variant of Marxism is wont to do.

But it appears that for Hegel that particular mode of consciousness which is philosophy does follow after changes in life. The consciousness which is inseparable from life forms is carried by other vehicles. It is expressed in the practices themselves, in the way described above (Chapter XIV), or in art, or religion. Philosophy is special among the manifestations of an era in its tardy appearance and recapitulative role.

Why is this? It would appear to be because philosophy is purely a mode of consciousness in a sense which is not true of the other manifestations. We saw in the previous chapter how religion straddled the distinction between mode of consciousness and effective practice, in that it combined a vision of God and a cult, bound together by the underlying stance of devotion. And art in the ages where it is fundamental to a civilization, e.g., among the Greeks, is inseparable from religion. The Greek art-religion had cults which were forms of art, e.g., festivals, tragedy. But philosophy by contrast is in the realm of pure thought. Its very clarity means that it is disintricated from the other levels of life and feeling, that it is purely contemplative and theoretical.

Thus unlike art in its crucial stages, unlike religion, philosophy is not the activity of a whole society. It is the property of single individuals, or very small communities (e.g., the Pythagoreans) who are not really understood by their time. The development of philosophy is thus not a factor in or vehicle for the real development of modes of life in history, as is the development of religion; which is why religious cult is still an essential part of that effective reconciliation of finite with infinite spirit in the modern world which has to be realized in life before philosophy can grasp it in thought.

There is one glaring, apparent exception to this rule of the historical inefficacy of philosophy, and that is Socrates, the only philosopher who was also a world-historical figure. But this is the exception, which in a sense proves the rule. For Socrates’ world-historical efficacy was bound up with the collapse of the polis. The rise of universal subjectivity which he helped crystallize was precisely the inner decay of Sittlichkeit. And it issued not in a new Sittlichkeit, but in a reflection of individuals back into themselves.

The true birth of theory helps to shatter the unreflective unity with substance. But philosophy is impotent to bring a new world to existence. It remains the appanage of a few, disparate individuals, not expressed in collective practice. The birth of effective reconciliation and a new world has to await the coming of Jesus.

2
Philosophy is thus the perfect contemplative mode of consciousness; in thought, which is the true medium of Spirit, where Spirit is truly free and bei sich. The vocation of philosophy from the very beginning is to be the vocation of Spirit’s self-recognition in everything that is. Hence from the beginning philosophy has the intuition that thought is not only its medium, but its object, that everything is at its base thought.

Thus the history of philosophy develops in a sense a single philosophy through different forms (GPhil, 124). But the basic insight is at first clouded. It has the right content, but an inadequate form (op. cit., 126), and it is forced to develop by its contradictions. Being a development moved by contradiction, its stages are necessary.

The progress of philosophy is necessary. Every philosophy had necessarily to appear at the time that it did; thus each philosophy appeared at the right time, none outleapt its moment, but all of them grasped the spirit of their time in thought.(GPhil, 125)

But because we are dealing in a sense with the development of a single philosophy, nothing is lost. Earlier philosophies are retained in the fully adequate one as moments, for the true self-understanding of Geistis a return to himself out of alienation. The different philosophies are necessary stages on this return, and hence are legitimately part of the final synthesis.

The philosophies [sc. which have appeared in history] are absolutely necessary and hence imperishable moments of the whole, of the Idea; thus they are preserved, and not only in memory, but in an affirmative fashion.(GPhil, 126)

In the Orient Geist is still absorbed (versenkt) in nature (GPhil, 229–31), thought is not yet really free. It is rudimentary, confined to a vision of the absolute abstraction of the universal in which everything is swallowed up. Hence philosophy proper starts with the Greeks. Even here it does not really get into high gear until the polis is on the decline with Socrates.3

The first movement of Greek philosophy reaches its culmination in Anaxagoras. It is a struggling through to the insight that thought is the basis of everything, thought, that is, as spiritual and self-moving. But at first with the Ionians this insight is still very imperfect, they are groping towards a basic principle, but it is still bound up with the material. It has not fully grown out of the consciousness of nature religion. And it lacks any principle of inner development.

Pythagoras thus is a step forward in these two regards. But he still has only the most external and unspiritual form of thought – number. Hegel as we saw throughout considered mathematical thought not the apex of rationality, as does the modern rationalist tradition, but on the contrary the most dead and external of all domains of thought. For the mathematical is the domain of understanding, of fixed distinctions and deductions which merely develop their implicit consequences. It lacks the distinctions of qualitative thought, the power to express a qualitative opposition, and hence the speculative, for only when the basic oppositions are seen in qualitative terms can one reach the insight that they go over into each other. Speculative reason cannot be expressed in mathematical terms.

The Eleatics come closer to the principle of pure thought. They also are the first to give dialectic its due: they show how the rival positions are not just set aside but refute themselves. But their dialectic remains subjective, it is a dialectic of refutation of false opinions, not in things. Heraclitus on the other hand recognizes the dialectic in reality. He does not exclude non-being from being, and sees that the two together generate becoming. Hegel thus reads in Heraclitus one of the capital transitions of his Logic.

This dialectic is still, however, abstract. It is not concretely embodied in things. Empedocles by contrast has a view of the union of opposites which is fully concrete, his theory of elements, but it in turn lacks living unity. His notion of union is confused and involves recourse to images like religious Vorstellung.

The atomism of Leucippus and Democritus represents another attempt to see one of the important dimensions of the concept in concrete, objective reality. The theory of atoms and the void is a concrete representation of the relation of being to non-being; so that atomism, too, is in this way beyond the Eleatic One. This is in a sense a purer expression than Empedocles’, but it remains tied to its material expression in the idea of a material atom. It is also too firmly fixed in the distinction of the understanding: atoms and void are external one to another. The principle of development whereby all the qualitative differences in things are generated remains unclear.

This atomism of course recalls another important passage of the Logic, Fürsichsein. Indeed this period is full of reminders of the Logic which in turn draws heavily in its examples on the philosophers of this period. The Logic provides the clue to their interpretation by Hegel.

This first movement of Greek philosophy comes to a head with Anaxagoras and his notion of nous. Now at last thought is recognized as the basis of things, not just abstractly, but as soul, the source of movement, in other words as the subject of purposes. Anaxagoras has the intuition that the world is to be understood teleologically. Hegel here follows Plato’s account of what Socrates found in Anaxagoras. But Anaxagoras cannot really follow this through. The inner purpose remains over against the simply positively present stuff of the external world. It does not posit this out of itself. So we pass to the next movement.

The next movement is where the centre of interest shifts to the free thought of the subject. This is the period inaugurated by the Sophists. Man’s thought is made the measure of all things and all fixed reference points outside are called into question. The laws which previously were unquestionably accepted must now be justified by Reason to man. This can lead to a dissolution of all standards and an exaltation of mere arbitrary will (Willkür), which it does with some of the Sophists.

But Socrates turns on the contrary to find universal criteria of reason in the depths of subjectivity. Socrates is looking for the universally valid norm, for the good. He is the founder of Moralität.

But there is a deep contradiction in Socrates’ démarche. His dialectic shows, on Hegel’s view, that we cannot generate concrete content for our ethical norms out of the principle of rational subjectivity alone. We derive a content only when we see what the form of community is which reason requires to be fully embodied. In other words, reason can give us a real normative content only via the notion of a sittlich community which it requires for its realization. The concrete content of our duties can only be given in the concrete demands this community makes on us. If we try to derive a morality simply of general rules, without any mention of societal context, we will find that no rule will really stand up to examination; all must admit of exceptions, and the problem arises of judging when they really apply and when they do not. This Hegel holds is what the Socratic dialectic shows. This of course parallels the later point about Kant.

The great contradiction is that while the times are not yet ripe for the development of a fully rational Sittlichkeit out of the identity of the universal subject (they will not be yet for some 2200 years), Socrates’ teaching helps to break down the only Sittlichkeit that then exists, the unreflecting one. There is a certain truth in the charge on which he is condemned to death: his reflecting consciousness is the death of Greek Sittlichkeit.

Then comes Plato. It is not possible to do real justice to Hegel’s discussion of Plato, and even more Aristotle, which takes up a large proportion of his lectures. The reason is obvious: Hegel drew heavily on these giants of ancient philosophy, particularly Aristotle. I cannot claim to do more than briefly indicate how he sees the development of philosophy passing through them.

Plato unites the pre-Socratic and the Socratic. He sees thought not only as the essence of man, but as the ground of all things. The Idea of the Good is the root of everything; this is not just a supersensible reality, but rather an underlying rationality. This rationality is the ground of being. Thus Plato has grasped the basic truth of speculation. He has given the principle of philosophy, the principle of Idealism, a pure and lofty expression. The Idea is not secondary, predicate, but is what is substantive, the self-subsistent.

Secondly Plato grasps that knowledge must come from out of oneself. He thus has an insight into the speculative truth that the true knowledge of thought is not inculcated from outside, but must be inwardly developed. Ultimately thought must justify its own premisses, and hence be totally self-dependent. Only of course, Plato does not grasp this in such a fully clear form. The truth rather comes in the cloudy form of the doctrine of reminiscence. Hegel of course cannot resist connecting this with his doctrine through a pun on the German word ‘Erinnerung’, ‘memory’, which as Er-innerung is resonant with the notion of interiorization.

Thirdly, Plato sees that the mortal is that which is inadequate to the Idea. His dialectic begins to show how the particular dissolves itself into the universal, which as that in which the contradictions resolve is the truly concrete. But Plato does not fully dominate his own insight here, and the dialectic often leads to a simply negative result.

But of course, Plato could not have grasped the fullness of speculative philosophy at that stage. We can outline three, connected insights which are missing: the Idea is not really active, it does not generate its sensible content. Nor does the order of ideas have an inner principle of development, which generates all the ideas in their order. In other words, Plato’s world of Ideas is not Hegel’s logical realm. Thirdly, connected with this, God remains separate from the world of ideas, he is still ‘represented’ (vorgestellt).

Hegel cites a great many details in his rich discussion of Plato’s work. Let me just mention the Republic which he sees as literally a reactionary work. Plato tried to deny the principle of subjectivity which had then broken out, and re-establish a Sittlichkeit which would have no place for it. But this was impossible. Modern Sittlichkeit must have a place for marriage and the family and property.

So great is Aristotle that he makes serious progress in two of the domains where we have seen Plato to be inadequate. For Aristotle the Idea is active, the Form is the formative principle in matter. Aristotle is the man who fully develops one of the most important principles of the Hegelian system, the principle of inner teleology. The Forms are not separate from things, but are the formative principles within them. The sensible is shaped by the Form.

Aristotle also has a more satisfactory idea of God as the unmoved mover whose pure activity was thought, and in whom Form and matter are the same. This highest activity of thought was thus not dependent on some prior existent matter in order to actualize itself. Hegel gives Aristotle high marks for this.

Aristotle’s notion of virtue as an interpénétration of reason and desire is also another seminal basis of Hegel’s thought, which is opposed both to hedonism, and the sharp distinction of duty and inclination which he finds in Kant.

But in the third respect above, it is obviously not possible to expect Aristotle to have achieved a contemporary insight: his world of Forms is still without inner principle of self-derivation. It is not the Logic. By contrast Aristotle is the father of formal logic, of the logic of the understanding. His grasp of speculative connections was so deep, however, adds Hegel, that his actual insights were often well ahead of his logical theory.

So what is lacking with both these giants is a notion of the universal which would develop all the particular out of itself in a whole system. The Idea in Plato is abstract. Even though with Aristotle it develops to the notion of a thought which thinks itself, it still does not have this character of generating all out of it. The level of culture and science is as yet insufficient.

This means that in this world, the particular is just subsumed under the universal without inner connection. Hence we have dogmatism, and its simple opposite: scepticism. Different schools simply assert that their favourite principles are the ground of everything: the Stoics make thought; the Epicureans make particular sensation, particular beings, atoms, the principle. But none of these are proven, as the sceptics rightly point out.

But all these schools have taken from their predecessors that the principle of things is to be found also in subjectivity. And this is the period in which the sittlich community has collapsed and man is thrown back on himself. The inability of the various universal principles to articulate themselves into the manifold of reality is thus parallel to the inability of the universal subject to articulate a sittlich world which would give content to his aspirations and in which he would be at home. These two dimensions are closely linked.

Hence Stoic morality ends up with an empty coincidence with self which abandons all claims on the external world: the Stoic sage can be inwardly free whether on the throne or in chains. The Stoic has a morality only of the abstract universal man, not of the concrete differentiated man who has some station in life and polity. Quite understandable one might think in an ethic founded on pure thought. But the Epicureans do not fare any better. For theirs too is an ethic of impotence. The goal is pleasure, but in the end the stress on self-sufficiency and inner satisfaction is such that only the most inward and thought-dependent pleasures are valued. They, too, make no claim on the external world. As for the sceptics, their position expresses a renunciation of the external. This discussion parallels in part the interesting derivation in PhG, IV.

But this then gives rise to the third movement of ancient philosophy, which we see principally in the Neo-Platonists. Hegel sees that the abstract universal of the second period now produces differentiation out of itself, but in a purely super-sensible world. The world of Plotinus is a return to the self-thinking thought of Aristotle but with a great speculative development, that all the forms which make up the intelligible world are now seen as emanating from the One. The principle of self-generating movement is there in the intelligible world. Of course it is still not properly worked out. It is still full of Vorstellen, and above all it is only the generation of an intelligible world, not yet fully articulated into the sensible world. The deep truth of reconciliation between the intelligible and reality is not yet present, the reconciliation between the Idea, the cosmic Spirit, and the real, concrete, finite spirit. This is to come in Christianity. But in a sense Neo-Platonism is a kind of adumbration of the speculative truth of Christianity in the still ineffective mode of a vision of the intellectual world. As such, it can be seen as the ancient world of philosophy coming to the historic rendez-vous with the new revealed religion.

Thus the first period of the ancient world was founded on an abstract principle (e.g. Eleatics); the second rose to the principle of subjectivity, of self-consciousness; the third becomes concrete, and sees a world generated out of thought. But it is still supra-sensible, it has not yet come to the infinite subjectivity in finite subjectivity, to absolute freedom, to God in man.

The Incarnation must come. For the Neo-Platonists lack the point where the real opposites unite, where the intelligible world is one with the real outer one, the moment of a real particular ‘this’, of Wirklichkeit. This comes in the Incarnation, and the founding of the Christian community (Gemeinde). This takes man into a new religious development.

But this is a development in which man stands before a reconciliation which is already realized, which he has to interiorize. This reconciliation is a sensibly presented fact before him, as we saw earlier. It is a brute fact, not something which he can produce from his own thought, or yet understand fully by thought.

Man thus enters a period in which he must submit to an external crucial fact, and allows himself to be educated up to full interiorization of its significance. He enters a period of tutelage. But this is incompatible with true philosophical thought. Philosophy is by definition free thought, reposing on its own inner conviction of rational cogency. By contrast mediaeval thought is a period in which philosophy was in service, the handmaid of theology. Just as the Church had to take the barbarian nations into tutelage to train them up to the Idea, so it presses philosophy into service, and uses it to work out the fullness of its vision of God. Thus in a sense we can say that the Middle Ages is not a period of philosophy. Only the ancient and the modern worlds truly are. During the Middle Ages only the Arab East developed philosophy further in the pure Idea. But this does not mean that the Middle Ages is not full of interesting and important intellectual constructions, or that it will not importantly influence philosophy later on. It is far from being a blank page in the history of philosophy. Only men started then from given premisses, the deliverances of revelation, not authenticated by philosophy itself. (But of course these theological premisses were an sich speculative.)4

3
So we come to the modern world. Philosophy is reborn as an independent activity. For man once more turns to himself in self-dependence. The Reformation represents a refusal of the spiritual as something merely external, in host as a thing, in charismatic authority, in relic or sepulchre. Instead it seeks to find union with God in a spiritual, inner way. Thus man moves away from external authority to the inner testimony of his own spirit. At the same time, this spiritualization goes along with a greater interest in this world. The gross, reified sacred of mediaeval religion went along with an other-worldliness as its natural pendant. The reified sacred expressed a condition of grossness and untamed naturality. In this world, the highest spirituality had to be flight. But the new principle of the Reformation, while spiritualizing the Christian presence tries to make it penetrate all of life. Hence secular life becomes important.

Thus the Reformation is part of the same basic movement as the Renaissance; which led to the great interest in exploration, the great burst of scientific effort, and so on. In this environment, philosophy as an attempt to think once more in free independence is naturally re-born.

So once again men take up the standpoint of the followers of Socrates, that we are certain of discovering the principle of things within our own self-consciousness, that by thought we can penetrate to the very basis of things. But this confidence now exists to a higher power. Where the ancients discovered the principle of the intelligible world in thought, but could never fully overcome the dualism with the sensible world, the moderns build on the certainty of Christianity that the Idea is fully reflected in the sensible world. The sensible world, in other words, is not just a cause of alienation and loss of the spiritual, it is posited by it. This is what is expressed in the Christian dogma of the creation of the world by God, who ‘saw that it was good’. Thus Christians, even those influenced by Neo-Platonism like Augustine, cannot look on the sensible creation as negative, as a source of alienation.

The speculative instinct contained in this dogma lies at the basis of modern philosophy, though this is not clearly seen at the beginning. That is, there is a kind of instinctive certainty that rational thought will find itself expressed in being, even the most external and sensible being; that thought and being are one. There is a Christian-inspired absolute confidence in this reconciliation. ‘The reconciliation...has occurred an sich’ (SW, XIX, 274). And this reason which is expressed in being is that which can be fully encompassed by the finite subject.

Thus the modern age has the boldness and courage to express the oppositions in their purest and most radical form, confident of their overcoming. And the principal opposition of the modern age is the most radical one, that between being and thought. But this comes out in other oppositions which are related, like that between freedom and necessity, soul and body, etc. Two basic approaches are taken to these oppositions; one starts from the natural (empiricism, natural philosophy, derivation of rights from nature), the other from the idea (various forms of idealism).

As a sort of hors d’oeuvre Hegel starts off by considering two rather ill-assorted philosophers, Bacon and Böhme. Bacon is taken up as the originator of empiricism, the enemy of scholasticism, and final causes. Hegel uses this as an occasion to show that empiricism prepares its opposite, that it discovers an articulation of things which prepare us later for a vision of how they developed out of the Idea, and indeed empiricism prepares some of the concepts for this, all unwillingly.

Böhme was, of course, an important figure for the Romantic generation. And Hegel sees prefigured in Böhme’s figurative, mystical language, the central truths of speculative philosophy. Though why this should be considered philosophy is not entirely clear; unless it is that it is a theology which makes no attempt to base itself on any positive authority.

So we enter in the seventeenth century on the movement of modern philosophy proper. This unlike the ancients will give due honour to the empirical. It will take seriously and try to encompass the empirical and contingent, external reality. Hence modern philosophy gives rise to a burgeoning empirical science. But at the same time, it strives to overcome in thought the opposition between thought and being which it has the courage to push to its ultimate sharpness, a courage born of its deep instinctive confidence that this opposition is overcome.

Hence modern philosophy is marked both by a scientific movement and a metaphysical one, sometimes in intrication, sometimes in opposition. Descartes is the major opening figure of modern European metaphysics. Descartes brings us back to the full philosophical tradition of the Greeks; he is free from all authority. His questioning is radical. In this he may remind us of the ancient sceptics. But the difference, says Hegel, is that while these latter aimed to achieve a sense of their own freedom in this questioning, Descartes wanted to win through to solid knowledge of objective reality. For as a modern he is concerned with uniting thought to external reality.

But Descartes’ démarche is thoroughly philosophical. He is determined to found all knowledge on the power of thought alone; no presuppositions are to be accepted. This is the point of methodical doubt. Thought is to be entirely bei sich, says Hegel, no matter foreign to it is to be accepted. But Descartes, in Hegel’s judgement, does not manage fully to live up to this, as we shall see.

Hence his radical thought starts with the ‘I’, with self-consciousness as thinking. And from this Descartes derives his famous cogito. Hegel sees this, in line with his whole angle of vision on modern philosophy, as the assertion of an immediate identity between thought and being: cogito, ergo sum. The identity is immediate, because as Descartes insists there is not even an inference here.

But the thought here is pure and abstract. That is, none of the contents of my thought are englobed in this certainty, just the fact of thinking itself, with the inseparable concomitant of existing, is the turning point of doubt to certainty. Thought here is a universal, abstracted from all content. But of course this fits admirably with one of the Hegelian theses of the Logic: that thought which negates all its inner determinations returns to immediacy, and in its immediacy it is identical to Being, to the pure Being which is the starting point of the Logic. At the end of the Logic, thought goes over into being because its pure self-mediation is a kind of return to immediacy.

But of course he has not got it right, because he has no inkling of the immense inner self-articulation of thought and hence of being as truly developing out of it. His thought is thoroughly abstract and lacks all principle of development. Thus it is that when Descartes goes forward to establish the content of the empirical world against doubt he has to fall short of his promise and have recourse to presuppositions, to premisses and elements which he merely accepts without being able to establish them by thought alone, to principles which are merely ‘come upon’ (vorgefunden). This is Hegel’s judgement, for instance, on the recourse to God as guarantor of the veracity of my perceptions in the Meditations. And of course Descartes does not see that thought as such goes over into being. The thought which he is starting from is just the subjective thought of the I. That thought which is basic to all, God, is separate from and over against the I.

The result of this is that Descartes indeed ends up with an opposition between thought and being. Because their unity in the cogito is simply immediate, combining merely abstract thought with being, their true unity cannot be portrayed, and over against the being-which-is-thought, the cogito, is another mode of being which is radically non-thought, matter. Descartes thus poses a radically dichotomous opposition between thought and being, and in this he is a foundation thinker for the whole modern age, which as we have seen, has as its basic theme to push this opposition to its pure and radical form.

But the matter of Descartes which is in radical dichotomy with thought is itself very abstract and hence thought-derived. Its essence is extension, which is the property of matter which can be derived in pure thought, and not like other properties, smell, colour, etc., merely by the senses. This is a frequent theme with Hegel, that the pure matter of modern philosophy is so much à vision of thought and so little of sensuous experience that it constantly belies the role it is made to play. In accounting for reality in terms of matter, philosophers have often seen themselves as offering an explanation in radically non-spiritual terms, as developing a thoroughgoing naturalism. But in fact this pure matter is so rarefied by thought that explanations in terms of it might just as well be seen as having the opposite sense, as giving a basic ontological role to the spiritual, to thought. This matter is a Gedankending, but not in the usual dismissive sense, rather as such it touches on the deepest reality.5

Descartes’ matter is seen by Hegel as the transposition of abstract thought into external reality. Because the notion of thought is abstract and without rich internal development, so is the notion of matter. It is in the end simply extension, and because thought is essentially active, motion. All is to be explained in terms of extension and motion, that is everything in nature. Motion is the abstract, external transposition of the rich activity of thought. To explain everything by extension and motion is to explain it mechanically, and this becomes the main category of explanation with Descartes. He is thus the father of mechanism. But by the same token he cannot really understand life, and those domains of philosophy which can be called philosophy of spirit: psychology, politics, etc., are ill-developed in this thought.

By contrast, he develops a physics. But here Descartes and his age have not yet made the clear distinction in their physics between a science based on observation and one which develops its determinations purely out of the concept.6

Spinoza goes further. He takes off from Descartes, from the latter’s opposition between thought and extension, and tries to unite these. This is an altogether more contentful and difficult enterprise than asserting the simple identity of abstract thought and being. In extension we have a less abstract, more developed determination of being and hence the problem of unity is greater and the notion of unity much higher, more developed.

Spinoza is in fact an important philosopher; one of the most important for Hegel’s thought, along perhaps with Aristotle and Kant. Spinoza attempts to see the whole as system with God as its ontological base, a God who unites thought and being. Thus Hegel is always ready to rush to Spinoza’s defense against the charge of atheism. Rather, as Hegel says, since God alone is the substance into which all determinations sink, we might more justly accuse Spinoza of the opposite fault, acosmism.

And this, indeed, is the burthen of Hegel’s critique of Spinoza, who of course was a seminal philosopher for Schelling and for the whole Romantic generation.7 Spinoza is thus one of Hegel’s crucial landmarks, against which he defines his own position.

The trouble with Spinoza is that he has grasped the absolute as a single substance, but not yet as subject. He sees all the determinations of the world, including the ‘attributes’ of thought and extension as going back to a single substantial ground, to a basic unity. But this God of Spinoza lacks the movement in the other direction: he does not produce in turn all the articulation of the world by his own inner necessity, as Hegel has shown to be the case of the Idea. The God of Spinoza is thus not yet a living spirit, who must generate his own embodiment and return to himself out of it. In him, all determinations are cancelled, annulled, but they are not generated by an inner necessity. In this sense, God lacks the crucial characteristic of the Hegelian subject. God is just substance, indeed he is merely an empty ‘abyss’ (Abgrund) in which all differences disappear, rather than the germinal centre from which they can all be seen to unfold by inner necessity. The actual determinations of the world are thus still not derived by necessity, but just ‘come upon’ (vorgefunden).

In this way, Spinoza, a Jew, remains with the Jewish absolute which is unreconciled with the articulated empirical world, and with finite subjectivity, who only exists still in the movement of negation of this finitude, without returning to be reconciled to it. But Spinoza’s is of course a highly philosophically-transformed version of this vision. In this respect it can also be compared to the to on of the Eleatics, which also lacked the principle of inner development.

Hegel makes central use of the famous Spinozist principle: omnis determinate est negatio. This is another way of expressing his debt to Spinoza. But here again we can see his basic critique. For Spinoza, this means that all the determinate realities of the world are carved out, as it were, from the whole. They are arrived at by selecting from the whole and negating the rest. The fully positive is thus that which is quite free of negation. But for Hegel the positive can only be the negation of the negation. It cannot exist without the negation of it which is its embodiment in the particular, with all the alienation, loss of self, and hence negation of its infinity which this entails. The positive, God, the infinite, the very basis of things, only can be by returning to itself out of these negations. Thus if it is true that determinate being is a negation of the absolute or infinite, it is also true that this infinite must issue in this negation. It must negate itself; and is only finally at one with itself by returning out of this negation.

We can also see the same difference from another angle in looking at Spinoza’s theory of attributes and modes. These distinctions in the absolute substance are seen as introduced in it through subjective thought; the absolute refracts in that way into finite thought. The differences are not seen as integral to it.

This lack in the content of his philosophy is matched, says Hegel, by a lack in its form. Spinoza proceeds more geometico. We have already seen that for Hegel the mathematical is the poorest mode of thought and the farthest removed from the speculative. This naturally goes together with the failure to grasp the principle of inner development of the Idea. Hence we proceed from definitions and deductions from definition; we do not see how these notions so defined themselves issue necessarily out of the Concept, e.g., thought, extension, understanding, will, etc. We are still operating with presuppositions.

However, like Aristotle, the results are often much higher than the theory. Some of Spinoza’s definitions are full of deep speculative content. Hegel mentions, e.g., the notion of God as causa sui, Spinoza’s notion of the true infinity of God who is unbounded totality. The latter is close to the Hegelian.

But the distinction between thought and extension made by Descartes does not just disappear. The fixity of the distinction is defended against the Spinozistic ‘abyss’ (Abgrund) by another school, the empiricists. The modern world has as inner principle the unity of thought and being, but this means also that it really takes seriously external, empirical reality. These two concerns cannot be fully effectively united until the synthesis in true speculative philosophy. Until then they animate different philosophies with different priority weightings, and these philosophies are thus opposed. Hence while Spinoza gives primacy to the unity, Locke, and we shall see in a moment in another way Leibniz, give priority to the real independence of the external, empirical reality.

Hence the démarche of Locke is to start from the existent outside of consciousness, to take the Cartesian dichotomy and give the primacy to extention. The universal is not the root of all, thought is not substance. On the contrary the universal is derived subjectively out of the empirical object, (‘entsteht subjektiv aus den Gegenständen’ SW, XIX, 419). This means that empirical thought has no use for a real essence, and hence never attains to the understanding of the essence as Genus (Gattung) which posits its empirical objectivity. Empiricism, just as much as Cartesianism, is dealing with a reality not derived from necessity, but just ‘come upon’ (vorgefunden). But now this is openly recognized, and indeed, seen as the principal value of this philosophy.

This path is a necessary phase. We have to gain greater knowledge of external reality through observation only before we can come back to discern in it the workings of the Concept. At this stage, both the empiricist and idealist sides of modern consciousness, those which stress unity and those which stress distinction, must proceed autonomously to their full development in order to prepare the ultimate rendez-vous. Hence the empirical efforts of Newton, or in another field Grotius, have a great importance. But it must be stressed that these thinkers often found themselves operating with a certain level of speculative concepts all unknowing. Newtonian science makes essential use of the concepts from the middle sphere in the logic, the sphere of reflection: e.g., forces. But the full significance of this only comes clear later. It all shows that the Concept is inescapable.

Leibniz too is a revendication of the differentiated reality against the Spinozistic Abgrund. But here the main point of rebellion is the individual, subjectivity. The Leibnizian monad is a deep speculative expression of the notion of a self; for it is a real unity of simplicity and difference, like the I. It contains the principle of movement in itself, the principle of negativity whereby it is not just unity but inherently differentiated. It is a ‘simplicity in the multiplicity, but a simplicity which is at the same time change, movement of the multiplicity’ (SW, XIX, 459). It is active and not just a subject of representation (vorstellend).

Hegel also lauds Leibniz’s principle of the Identity of Indiscernables, which he takes over from him. But he gives it also a deeper speculative interpretation. It means, he says, that all things have the principle of their differentiation from others in themselves, that their difference from others is not just inertly there but something they actively assert and defend. That is why we find the defining characteristics of certain animals, for instance, in their claws, because that is what they maintain themselves by. Thus the frontier of differentiation is also a frontier of opposition, as we saw earlier in the Logic.

But the faults of Leibniz are closely linked with his achievements. He has wonderfully revendicated against Spinoza the place of subjectivity, of the actively self-differentiating and hence individual. This speculative principle achieves a deep statement in his doctrine of the monad. But the price he pays is that he cannot give an account of the unity of things. How do all the monads articulate together? There is no satisfactory answer to this in Leibniz.

The way the monads cohere together, their harmony, is not understood out of their own natures. Its inherent necessity is not made clear, but it is simply posited as coming to them from the outside, as ‘pre-established’ by God. The unity whose inner necessity we do not understand is thrown into God. It remains unilluminated. True, we supposedly know the goals of God’s operation in establishing this world and its harmony, in that he is supposed to act so as to create the best possible world. But this remains purely formal. We cannot really understand why this is the best possible world.

This means for Leibniz that the evil in it is necessary for the good. But why this is so, or why evil is bound up with finitude, or why finitude is necessary, all this is not satisfactorily explained. Hegel, of course, will give the explanation.

Leibniz, in other words, cannot really penetrate to the inner necessity of connections. In keeping with this his notion of conceptual unity remains too close to the deductive. Even when we come to see all determinations as inwardly connected, as they are in the perception of a single monad which perceives the whole world from its point of view, this is just a reproduction in this monad of the uncomprehended coherence of things attributed to God’s action. We cannot see the necessity of the connection as springing from the very inner nature of things connected. We remain with unconnected individual realities. We have indeed gained individuality, but have lost the whole.

Thus Leibniz, like Spinoza and Locke, and in his own way, cannot yet achieve the speculative vision of the concept developing reality out of itself by an inner necessity.

Hegel here has some unkind words for Wolff as an expositor of Leibniz in a particularly dead, pedantic way.

But at this point the modern thrust in philosophy becomes more radical. The modern certainty is that thought or the absolute is one with being, even the external, empirical reality of the world and of finite subjects. And this certainty is animating a philosophy, that is, it is not just accepted as the deep truth of revealed religion but it is meant to be grasped in human thought. Man, as it were, revendicates this right. There is in a sense a triangle: finite spirit, infinite spirit, world of things, which are in ultimate union, where spirit and matter are one. But finite spirit does not and cannot realize this unity alone, but only through infinite spirit. Descartes links our mind to the world in the certainty of perception through God; thought and extension meet in the Absolute for Spinoza; Leibniz’s monads are harmonized by God.

But now human self-consciousness makes a more radical claim, to find unity with the world without the offices of God. Man as finite spirit can achieve this unity by plumbing the secrets of the world and reconstructing it according to human reason, so that it is fully pliable to his purposes. The reconciliation of thought and being, spirit and outer reality, will come through a domination of the second by the first, a complete conquest. But this is now to be achieved by finite spirit. We are entering the age of the Enlightenment.

To put it in another way, modern philosophy from Descartes to Leibniz is ‘metaphysical’, in the sense that it unites thought and being through postulating a supersensible order of being which sustains the empirical world. Now the radical self-confidence of human self-consciousness can no longer accept such speculations about a beyond. It directs against metaphysics a withering scepticism. And since this metaphysics is of the understanding, that is, has no idea yet of the development of reality out of the Idea, but just must state dogmatically the ontological primacy of thought, it is easy prey to this scepticism.

But this scepticism is not just despairing, or nihilistic, it springs from a profound confidence that finite human spirit can achieve reconciliation, is fundamentally in unity with external reality. It is a radical turn of the modern confidence that thought = being which attributes this achievement to finite thought. But of course this is as much a theory of the understanding as its metaphysical opponent; it too stops at fixed distinctions between things, and cannot see the inner connections. It too is one-sided. But it can make headway against metaphysics because the fault of the latter is that it is dogmatic.

The Enlightenment has two variants, which can roughly be identified as British and French. The British variant is more contemplative. A transition figure is Berkeley who collapsed external being into my representations. But these are still seen as produced by God. As Hegel points out, no speculative progress is achieved by this equivalence, for the inner necessity of the representations is just as little understood as when they were seen as things.

Hume represents a real radicalization of empiricism. The reference of everything to experience in a radical way does away with all necessity. Even causation is deprived of its necessity and reduced to a subjective connection. Hegel insists on reading the subjectivism of Hume not as a despairing confession of the impotence of human thought, but rather as expressing the deep sense that all that mattered concerning the basis of reality was available to finite self-consciousness.

Thus in the moral sphere, Hume’s scepticism undermines all sittlich objective criteria. But the result of this is that we are thrown back on our own moral sentiment. And from Hume and other thinkers of the time there developed a theory of moral sense which expresses once again the principle of total confidence in self-consciousness. It shows, remarks Hegel, the stage of formation (Bildung) which Spirit has attained at this point.

With the French, the Enlightenment goes over onto the offensive, as it were. It strives after practical realization. It claims the right to reconstruct all of reality according to the dictates and norms developed by finite self-consciousness. It thus rejects all traditional morality, obligations to God, and any such norms not validated by self-consciousness.

God, if he goes on existing, is thus emptied and reduced to a pallid être suprème. Or else the Enlightenment takes the more radical step of denying anything except the finite. There is nothing except external, contingent being, which means ultimately, material being. Hence the radical Enlightenment goes to materialism; finite spirit is itself identical to matter. We come to another form of the equivalence of thought and being. But here again an immediate and stultifying one. Hence this Enlightenment science is just as incapable as its predecessors of explaining the inner articulations of things out of necessity, or of understanding the unfolding of things. This science is just crassly empirical.

The empty thought of the être suprème, and the inert abstract matter of materialism are not that far apart, as we remarked before. Both express the unbounded self-affirmation of finite self-consciousness, its refusal of an infinite, spiritual reality beyond. Hence we find the Enlightenment described as the absolute reign of the finite. Everything is finite, all the contents of the world, themselves finite, are laid before finite subjectivity. As finite, nothing has its raison d’etre in itself. Hence this is the ideology of utility, universal utility. To see something under the light of utility is to see its raison d’etre in something else, to see it as good for something else. The Enlightenment, taking the standpoint of the finite, is the age of utilitarianism.

But this confident self-consciousness steps over into action. The movement which began with Luther, and was carried forward in the modern period, has now come to an extreme form. There is no absolute beyond finite self-consciousness. The notion of Luther is that all men must interiorize the truth spiritually. There are no laymen, who must receive the sacred from outside, from priests. This principle is now about to be applied to the political world.

This leads to a negation of Spirit, of the larger order, and here of the real conditions of Sittlichkeit. We have already followed this disastrous movement. It comes to climax in the French Revolution. It has the essential idea of free will, or of thought making an external reality which is adequate to it. But it crucially fails to recognize the true nature of thought or Geist. It sees this as purely human, and can thus realize no adequate existence. Either we have the form of thought, but the content of ethics is given just by de facto desire (Trieb), or with Rousseau, we have the right content, the general will, but a disastrously wrong form – total participation and not the articulated, sittlich state. The disastrous consequences we have already seen.

This rage of subjectivity pushes us beyond. There is an absolute necessity to generate the concrete again, to come back to God. This is the task of the next and final cycle.

Hegel pauses for a consideration of Jacobi who as we have seen represents a Romantic streak of religion which has been infected by the Enlightenment to the point of denying knowledge of God. God is reachable only through immediate faith. But this religion which renounces thought is no answer to Enlightenment unbelief. Reason has to go beyond itself.

Kant who is the third great seminal figure for Hegel’s thought takes another great step forward. He is fully in the line of the Enlightenment, whose principle is freedom. Thought must develop in complete autonomy, it cannot accept any external authority. And he goes along with the radical twist that the Enlightenment gives to this modern idea: thought can rely only on what can be made present in self-consciousness. Kant thus takes the side of Hume in rejecting the great metaphysical constructions of the second phase which were presented in Germany by Leibniz and Wolff.

But Kant took a tremendous step forward in that while remaining within self-consciousness he saw the real nature of thought as activity. He agrees with Hume that necessary connection is not in the matter of experience; but unlike Hume he goes on to recognize it in the very structure of consciousness, that is in the concept. The concept is not just that which is abstracted from experience, but rather what shapes it. Kant has thus discovered the real nature of thought; it is not passive, not simply what contemplates and draws inferences (for rationalists) or registers concomitances (for empiricists). It is the active principle which shapes the things of experience.

But Kant’s great discovery is still incomplete. It lacks one thing. It still sees this thought, the active, shaping concept, as subjective, as the thought merely of self-consciousness; whereas in fact it is the ontological base of reality. And as a result, Kant sees conceptual form as having to receive its content from outside. It is ultimately passive in the sense that it needs to be affected from outside to function. But the truth of speculative philosophy is just that thought, the Concept, produces its own content out of itself. In the end all matter must be seen as posited by the Idea.

A crucial and hardly minor transposition; but one which provides the central access to the Hegelian system. Coming in from Kant, as it were, we enter through the front door. For many of the most important key Hegelian terms can only be understood as transposed from Kant. This is true of the Concept, which is the Kantian formative concept, given ontological status. It is true of the Logic, which can only be understood if we see it as a transcendental logic; it is true of the Idea, which derives not just from Plato but also through Kant as the completed form to which empirical reality tends. It is true of the distinction between ‘understanding’ (Verstand) and ‘reason’ (Vernunft). And so on.

But in all these cases, there is a systematic transformation. What for Kant is a structure of the mind is for Hegel an ontological foundation. The Concept is the basis of things, the Idea is that which posits reality. It is not simply an unfulfilled tendency; it is in a more fundamental sense than anything else. Hegel’s philosophy can be seen as transposed Kant. What for Kant is merely a striving of the subject is for Hegel a completed self-subsistent totality.

Thus Kant sees the primacy of thought when he shows that the ‘I think’ must accompany all my representations. The only possible objectivity is one structured by thought. But he sees this as a demand of subjective knowledge, not an ontological principle. His notion of the schematism was a profound idea, the structuring of empirical reality by thought, but the same criticism applies.

Kant remains with the Enlightenment in the crucial respect that he holds to finite self-consciousness as an insurmountable standpoint. But within this he takes a giant step forward. He sees thought as active, shaping. And hence he begins to fill a lack which has been evident in philosophy since the ancients: he begins to order the categories not just empirically, but in a rational structure. His hitting on the form of triplicity for the categories reflects a ‘great instinct of the Concept’. But of course he cannot push this insight right through to the full self-development which comes first in the Logic. Nevertheless, Hegel’s ‘category’ is also a Kant-transposed concept.

But Kant’s terrible shortcoming is to have accepted that the reality outside consciousness, the things in themselves, were beyond the reach of the Concept, and were to be distinguished from the appearances which the Concept shapes. This is an ‘abominable distinction’. It underlies all the errors of his philosophy.

His crucial strength and his crucial weakness come out again in the Transcendental Dialectic. Here to his undying merit Kant has seen the deep contradictions in our basic categories. But characteristically, he fails to see that these contradictions are ontological, they are not just in our thought. Kant is ‘too tender for things’, as Hegel puts it. He is also wrong to restrict the antinomies to four; every category is the locus of an antinomy.8

In the field of moral philosophy the same basic error is visible. True to the principle of the Enlightenment, practical reason is to decide everything out of itself. It is to accept no external authority, not even that of God. It is to realize full autonomy. But once again this sovereign self-consciousness is set over against the world. The empirical domain, including the domain of my de facto desires, is refractory to practical reason. Reason cannot be integrally realized in it. If it were, and we were really inclined to the good by pure desire, the moral realm in its autonomy would disappear. Yet the very essence of the moral law is to be realized. Hence we have a law that is to be realized and can never be so integrally; and thus we are forever on the way. We are forever in the domain of the unrealized ought, of Sollen. We are in an endless progress and we only complete it in thought by the postulates of practical reason. This critique of the Kantian ethic of Sollen is one of the most oft-repeated themes in Hegel.

Connected with this is the fact that the ethic to be drawn from self-consciousness alone can find no content. It is forced back onto a purely formal criterion, for no particular content in the world can provide a standard, all are looked on as arbitrary. The true insight is to see that reason itself produces an articulated content, a community which is the locus of Sittlichkeit, and this gives content to our ethic. But as long as we determine to abstract from all this, as long as we rely simply on the resources of autonomous finite self-consciousness, we can have nothing but formal criteria: the Kantian criterion of a maxim not contradicting itself. We have already seen that this is empty; and Hegel repeats here the argument about theft and property (SW, XIX, 592).9

But for all this, if Kant had just written the first two critiques he would have an outstanding place in the development of speculative philosophy. But he went farther. He wrote the Critique of Judgement; and here he laid the groundwork for a synthesis which straddles the dichotomy of his philosophy. This Critique is even more crucial for understanding Hegel’s philosophy than the rest of Kant’s work. Indeed, it is the starting point for the whole post-Kantian development.

In the objects of reflecting judgement, the work of art and the living being, we have a unity of form and content, of inner law and outer reality, which we are firmly denied in theoretical and practical judgement. For in these objects studied in the third Critique, matter and form are not separate. In reflecting judgement, we do not apply a universal form to a given content from outside. On the contrary, faced with a content, a particular, we look for a form which is peculiarly its. We discover a form which is thus immanent in the content, united with it, in the way that it never is in theoretical judgement. But this of course brings us back close to the Aristotelian idea of inner teleology, a necessity immanent in things themselves to assume their own shape. This inner necessity is of course for Hegel equivalent to freedom.

This is the inner teleology which we see in living organisms. And we have also seen how Hegel understands the work of art as inhabited by this same kind of inner necessity, one which unlike the living organism reveals itself, and exists only to show this free necessity. Because this is a manifestation of freedom, we feel free contemplating it, we are enraptured (entrückt). We saw how much Hegel’s aesthetics owes to Kant.

Kant however cannot take the crucial step. This great insight of inner teleology remains a façon de voir for him; it is not a reality of things themselves. But he prepares the ground for the transcending of his own position.

It is also of a piece with the rest of Kant’s position that he accepts the Enlightenment idea that God cannot be known. God is only an object of faith, and his authority over conscience is nil, unless it be simply to echo what rational will tells itself.

But Kant brought thought to such great heights that he awoke the irresistible urge to go beyond; and this in two directions: first, to complete the task of ordering the categories of thought in a consistent way, deriving from one another; and second, to overcome the Kantian dichotomy of form and matter; to derive reality from thought. The first craving was answered by Fichte, the second by Schelling.

The last eighty pages or so of the philosophy of history is taken up with Fichte, Schelling and various connected minor figures. It presents what Hegel sees as the immediate antecedents to his own philosophy. With Fichte, the attempt is made to develop all the categories out of a single principle in a systematic way. The starting point for Fichte is the I. Everything is to be developed from this. Fichte sees the I as under a necessity to posit a not-self, an opposed reality. Each of these can only be in relation to the other. There are two forms of relation: when the not-I is active, we have a theoretical relation, when the I is active, a practical relation. All the categories can be deduced from avatars of these relationships.

The I attempts constantly to abrogate and overcome the not-I. But this dualism is made ultimately insurmountable. So that Fichte like Kant has a philosophy of endless progress, of pure Sollen. In short, he has overcome one shortcoming of Kant, in that for the first time the categories have been fully and systematically derived and deduced. But he has not overcome the other shortcoming, which is to be still held at the standpoint of self-consciousness, of the I. His system therefore cannot be completed, cannot come to totality.

Remaining as he does at this standpoint of self-consciousness, of the individual will, Fichte’s political philosophy is as unsatisfactory as Rousseau’s and Kant’s. The universal is not the true spirit, the embodiment of freedom of the individuals, but simply a negative force over against them. Fichte tries to ground the state on freedom, following Rousseau and Kant, but achieves the exact opposite.

Fichte’s cult of the Ich resonates in certain strands of Romanticism, which cultivated inner feeling at the expense of reason and shrank away from external authority and action in history. Hegel mentions, e.g., Schlegel and Novalis. We have explored these connections.10

We turn now to Schelling who is the immediate ante-chamber to Hegel’s system. Hegel only realized that he was on a different wave length than Schelling after some years collaboration with him, around the time of the PhG. Schelling finally sees that finite and infinite, subject and object are untrue alone. That the only concrete unity is the unity of these opposites, not just in simple identity but in living process and movement. Schelling thus develops a deep philosophy of nature – Hegel drew many of his ideas from it.

But his inadequacy is that he saw this unity as being accessible to intuition. He did not yet understand that the unity has to be grasped in thought, that it can be derived in the pure self-mediations of the concept. He grasped for the first time the concrete content but he did not see that its proper form of development was logical. His intuition was not susceptible to proof. For Schelling the highest manifestation of the Idea is thus in the work of art, where it is open to intuition. The work of art is the ‘highest and only mode in which the Idea is for Spirit’. But for Hegel thought is higher, the Idea must yet come to itself in thought.

This inadequacy in form obviously repercusses onto the content of his system. Thus his philosophy of nature, while an attempt to show the progressively higher realization of the Idea, of concrete unity between subject and object, and while an immensely valuable beginning, is not really rigorously carried through. And this lack of rigor allowed Schelling’s disciples to roam all over the place with arbitrary, irresponsible analogies, and give philosophy of nature a bad name.

To put it in another way, we can say that with Fichte we have the affirmation of the autonomy of self-consciousness which has been pushed to a delirious extreme. The I is no longer limited by another, it is infinitely self-realizing. It is no longer set over against a reality which it can never encroach upon. But precisely because it is still just an I, it requires always that there be something over against it. In order to be consciousness, and not to fall into the emptiness of I = I, it must always have the not-I to contend with. Hence its process of encroaching on the not-I is endless. It is the first true philosophy of infinite self-realization. But the infinite here is ‘bad’; the process can never reach completion; it remains Sollen.

It is Fichte’s radical affirmation of finite subjectivity which shows that this standpoint must be transcended. And so we have to go back to a content outside of finite subjectivity, and this can only be done by seeing the unity of subjectivity with objectivity in a living totality which is infinite subjectivity. This is what Schelling does. But he cannot demonstrate it; he does not give its place to thought.

We thus come to the end with Hegel, who does take this last step of demonstrating the absolute as identity of subject and object in self-developing life. He shows the absolute to be thought, which is ultimately grasped in thought. It comes to itself in its own proper medium. The ‘intellectual intuition’ of Schelling to be really intellectual must become thought. And in this consummation the world-spirit puts aside all foreign, external (gegenständlichen) modes of self-understanding, and grasps itself as absolute Geist. It shows that what is objective is generated (erzeugt) out of itself.

We can now see that there has always only been one philosophy. It now reaches final form, but it has been going forward from the beginning, even when for a time its development went underground and was not fully apparent. Thought is always trying to grasp itself as concrete. Aristotie saw that nous is the thought of thought.

But this progress has been by stages. Each stage showed us the highest form that this single philosophy could reach then. And even where there were different competing philosophies, they form a whole together as a single link in chain, though this may only be evident later.

But now we seem to have come to a climax. ‘A new epoch has arisen in the world’ (SW, XIX, 689). Spirit at least seems to have come clear. What is objective to it, it produces from itself, and holds in its power peacefully. The struggle of finite self-consciousness with absolute self-consciousness seems to have come to an end. Finite self-consciousness is no longer finite, and so absolute self-consciousness has the reality it lacked. World history ‘seems to be at its goal’ (SW, XIX, 690).

 

 

1 ‘Daher gibt es schlechterdings auch nur eine Philosophie’ throughout the whole of history, GPhil, 124.

2 This passage is reminiscent, even in some of the expressions used, of the famous lines of the preface of PR, p. 13.

3 For the connection between political freedom and philosophy, cf. GPhil, 225–8 and 232–5.

4 One of these important ideas is the ontological proof of Anselm. This is the really speculative proof Hegel insists, because it starts with thought, the Idea, and goes over into existence, whereas the others move from existence, the contingent, etc., to God. Their form is thus inadequate to their content, because their form seems to imply that God is secondary to the world and not vice versa. Only the ontological proof is in the right order. But the proof as given by Anselm is in an inadequate form. Cf. discussion in Chapter XI.

5 Cf. the discussion on equivalence of pure matter and thought in the passage of PhG, VI on Enlightenment materialism.

6 ‘Ableiten aus dem Begriffe, frei selbstständige Entwicklung des Begriffs.’

7 Cf. Chapter I.

8 Cf. the discussion of the Logic, Part III, Chapter IX.

9 This is like the argument in his article of the early 1800s. ‘Über die Wissenschafdichen Behandlungsarten des Naturrechts’, discussed above in Chapter XIV. Basically the same critidsm of Kant’s moral philosophy, that in purifying the moral will and safeguarding its autonomy against any involvement with nature or dependence on God, Kant makes the demands of morality indeterminate in content and impossible of fulfilment, recurs throughout Hegel’s work. Cf. also PhG, 301–12, 424–44, PR, § 135, and elsewhere.

10 Cf. Chapters I and VI.

 
    