## CHAPTER XIV
## Ethical substance
1
Hegel’s philosophy of history and politics belong together, and form the sphere of what he calls ‘objective spirit’. In the system, this comes after subjective and before absolute spirit. Just as we saw that the underlying rational necessity expresses itself in the general structures of the natural world, so it expresses itself even more in the phenomena of the human world. These phenomena, in so far as they have to do with the existence of individual consciousness, are the matter of the sphere of subjective spirit, and in the Encyclopaedia this recapitulates and takes over some of the ground covered in the PhG. But beyond this realm is the whole domain of the public, social, political reality in history which must now be reclaimed for the Concept.

This domain is discussed in the Encyclopaedia § §468-535, and also in the famous cycle of lectures on the philosophy of history, published after Hegel’s death from his notes. Chapter VI of the PhG is a summary version of the philosophy of history. Finally, it includes Hegel’s work of 1821, the Philosophy of Right, which is taken as the major mature statement of his political philosophy. Certain works of the early 1800s are also useful here, and will be referred to below from time to time.

Hegel’s philosophy of history and politics has to be seen in three related frameworks. We should see it as an attempt to resolve in the sphere of politics what we have identified as the basic dilemma of this generation, how to combine the fullness of moral autonomy, with the recovery of that community, whose public life was expressive of its members and whose paradigm realization in history was the Greek polis. In this respect Hegel’s work is of continuing relevance today, as we shall see.

Secondly, since Hegel believed himself to have resolved the dilemma in his ontological vision, we must look at his political philosophy in this framework as well. And thirdly, we must see it in relation to the political problems and crises of Hegel’s time, which was dominated by the French Revolution and its aftermath. These events greatly contributed to shaping Hegel’s outlook, but they were also read by him through the categories of his philosophy, so that in fact the three frameworks have to be seen as forming a closely connected structure.

Let us start out by looking at Hegel’s political philosophy in the framework of his ontological vision. The goal towards which everything tends is the self-comprehension of Spirit or Reason. Man is the vehicle of this self-comprehension. Hence that Spirit know itself requires that man come to know himself and his world as they really are, as emanations of Spirit. This self-knowledge is expressed in art, religion and philosophy, which constitute the domain of absolute Spirit, which the mature Hegel designated as higher than that of politics.

But of course the full realization of absolute Spirit presupposes a certain development of man in history. Man starts off as an immediate being, sunk in his particular needs and drives, with only the haziest, most primitive sense of the universal. This is another way of putting the point that Spirit is initially divided from itself, and has yet to return to itself. If man is to rise to the point where he can be the vehicle of this return, he has to be transformed, to undergo a long cultivation or formation (Bildung).

But this cannot just be an alteration of his outlook. Since following the principle of embodiment, any spiritual reality must be externally realized in time and space, we know that any spiritual change requires a change of the relevant bodily expression. In this case, Spirit can only return to itself through the transformation of man’s form of life in history.

What then is the form of life which man must attain in order to be an adequate vehicle of Spirit? First of all, this must be a social form. We saw above in Chapter III how the existence of finite spirits, in the plural, was part of the necessary plan of Geist. To be embodied means to be at a particular time and place, and hence to be finite. But finite spirit must go beyond an identification of himself as a particular, and this is why the existence of many men and their life together in a society plays an essential part. Man is raised to the universal because he already lives beyond himself in a society, whose greater life incorporates his.

Thus in order to know itself in the world, Spirit has to bring about an adequate embodiment in human life in which it can recognize itself.

The goal of world history is that Spirit come to a knowledge of what it truly is, that it give this knowledge objective expression [dies Wissen gegenständlich mache], realize it in a world which lies before it, in short, produce itself as an object for itself [sich als objectiv hervorbringe, VG, 74].

That is why the state as the highest articulation of society has a touch of the divine in Hegel’s eyes. In order to realize God’s (Spirit’s) fulfilment, man has to come to a vision of himself as part of a larger life. And that requires that as a living being he be in fact integrated into a larger life. The state is the real expression of that universal life which is the necessary embodiment (it would not be inappropriate to say ‘material base’) for the vision of the Absolute. In other words, it is essential to God’s progress through the world that the state be, if I may be permitted to render the spirit of that famous line of PR whose mistranslation has caused so much trouble.1

But of course, the state as it starts off in history is a very imperfect embodiment of the universal. Not just any state will do. The fully adequate state which spirit needs to return to itself must be a fully rational one.

It is worth stopping to examine this in some depth. For the requirement that the state be rational may not strike us as having any clear sense. Indeed, the very invocation of reason as a criterion for moral or political decision has long been suspect to an important strand of anglo-saxon philosophy, nurtured on empiricism. But of course, this invocation of reason has recurred in different ways throughout the European philosophical tradition. Hegel’s use of it was quite original, and it will help to make this clear if we try to situate it in relation to the important landmarks of the tradition of practical reason.

One recognized form of the appeal to reason is that which goes back to Plato. Here ‘reason’ is understood as the power by which we see the true structure of things, the world of the Ideas. To act according to reason is to act according to this true structure, and was equivalent to acting according to nature.

Now this view was based on the idea that there is a larger rational order to which man essentially belongs. For if man is rational life, and to be rational is to be connected to this larger order in having a true vision of it, then man can only be himself in being so connected to this order. But as we saw in Chapter I, an important aspect of the seventeenth-century revolution was its rejection of this conception of the order in which man inheres in favour of the idea of a self-defining subject.

But this new view gave rise to a new conception of order, and hence a new kind of appeal to reason and nature. Man was now defined as a subject capable of rational thought and decision, and also as the subject of certain desires. An important strand of modern thought, in contrast to the tradition from Plato and Aristotle, takes these desires as given for moral reasoning; they cannot themselves be judged at the bar of reason. One of the most important early protagonists of this view is Hobbes, and it is continued in the utilitarian thinkers of the eighteenth century. Reason now comes to mean ‘reckoning’ and practical reason is the intelligent calculation of how to encompass ends which are beyond the arbitration of reason. This is of course the historical origin of the view mentioned above, according to which reason cannot provide a criterion for moral decision.

This was one side of Hobbes’ legacy. Reason and nature were dethroned as the ultimate criteria. There was no longer a normative order of things evident in nature of which man was a part, such that the ground of obligation could be found in nature. Rather, political obligation was grounded in a decision, to submit to a sovereign, dictated by prudence (calculating reason). For a self-defining subject obligation could only be created by his own will. Hence the great importance of the myth of the original contract.

But this new view could also be presented in another way. Man as a subject of desires had one great second-order goal, that the first-order desires be satisfied. Their satisfaction was what was meant by ‘happiness’ (Hobbes’ ‘felicity’) which was therefore given a quite different meaning than it had in the Aristotelian tradition. But then, whatever effect education (artifice) had in shaping the detail of our first-order desires, one could say that by nature and inescapably men desire happiness.

Now if intelligent calculation can show how to shape men and circumstances so that men achieve happiness, and all of them achieve it together and compatibly with each other, then is this not the highest goal, and one that is according to reason (intelligent calculation) and nature (the universal desire for happiness)?

There is a new conception of order here. Instead of seeing nature as expressing a meaningful order, one which has to be accounted for in terms of ideas, we see it as a set of interlocking elements whose relations can be explained in terms of efficient causation. The order (as against disorder) in things does not consist in their embodyng the underlying ideas, but rather in their meshing without conflict and distortion. Applied to the human realm, this means that man comes to realize natural order, when the company of desiring subjects comes to achieve full satisfaction (happiness), each compatibly with all the others. The perfect harmony of desires is the goal which nature and reason prescribe to man.

But a third conception of reason as criterion of action arose to challenge the utilitarian view in the late eighteenth century, and that was the radical moral autonomy of Kant. This view starts in a sense with Rousseau, to whom Hegel gives credit for it. It is a reaction against the utilitarian identification of good with interest and of reason with calculation. It wants to found our obligation on the will, but in a much more radical sense than Hobbes. Hobbes grounded political obligation on a decision to submit to a sovereign. But this decision was dictated by prudence, so that we can see the ground of obligation in Hobbes as the universal desire to avoid death. Hence the ‘first law of nature’, which is ‘to endeavour peace’. In the end certain natural facts about us, our desires and aversions, have a decisive part in deciding what we ought to do, as far as the utilitarian tradition is concerned.

The aim of Kant was to cut loose altogether from this reliance on nature, and to draw the content of obligation purely from the will. This he proposed to do by applying a purely formal criterion to prospective actions, which was binding on the will as rational. Rationality involves thinking in universal terms and thinking consistently. Hence the maxim underlying any proposed action must be such that we can universalize it without contradiction. If we cannot do this, then we cannot as rational wills conscientiously undertake this action. A will operating on this principle would be free from any ground of determination (Bestimmungsgrund) in nature and hence truly free.2 A moral subject is thus autonomous in a radical sense. He obeys only the dictates of his own will. Reason, as rational will, is now the criterion, but in a third sense, one opposed to nature.

Now Hegel builds on the whole development which we have sketched here. He will reconstruct the notion of a greater order to which man belongs, but on an entirely new basis. Hence he fully endorses the modern rejection of the meaningful order of nature, as seen in the Middle Ages and early Renaissance. These visions of order saw it as ultimately just given by God. The hierarchy of beings was an ultimate which could not be further explained or justified, and it was incumbent on man to take his proper place in this hierarchy. But the Hegelian notion of spirit as freedom cannot accommodate anything merely given, as we saw. Everything must flow of necessity from the Idea, from Spirit or Reason itself. Hence Spirit must ultimately rebel against anything merely given.

For this reason, Hegel sees the modern affirmation of a self-defining subject as a necessary stage. And he sees its necessary culmination in the radical Kantian notion of autonomy. Autonomy expresses the demand of Spirit to deduce its whole content out of itself, not to accept as binding anything which is merely taken up from outside.

In order to know what is truly right, we have to abstract from inclination, impulse, desire, as from everything particular; we must know, in other words, what the will is as such

(an sich, GW, 921)

and further

the will is only free, in so far as it wills nothing other, external, foreign – for then it would be dependent – but only wills itself, the will.

(loc. cit.)

He takes up the radical contrast between nature and spirit. The ‘substance’ of material nature is gravity, but that of spirit is freedom (VG, 55).3 Its freedom is to be centred on itself (in sich den Mittelpunkt zu haben).

The very notion of will is bound up with that of freedom. First, thought is essential to the will. It is its ‘substance’ so that without thought there can be no will’. (EG, § 468, Addition.)

It is because it is the practical expression of thought, that the will is essentially destined to be free.

Freedom is precisely thought itself; whoever rejects thought and speaks of freedom doesn’t know what he’s saying. The unity of thought with itself is freedom, the free will...The will is only free as thinking will.

(SW, XIX, 528–9)

In PR he takes up the same theme, and characterizes the will as ‘self-determining universality’, and hence as freedom (§21). It is ‘thinking getting its own way in the will’. Hegel here repeats that ‘it is only as thinking intelligence that the will is genuinely a will and free’. In the course of the same note to this paragraph, he takes a swipe at Romantic theories of freedom who ‘would banish thought and have recourse instead to feeling, enthusiasm, the heart and the breast’. This free will is also truly infinite, since its object is not an other or a barrier for it (§22). It is ‘released from every tie of dependence on anything else’ (§23), and it is universal (§24).

This will, which is determined purely by itself, and hence by thought or rationality, is the ultimate criterion of what is right. It is designated the ‘ground of right’ (der Boden des Rechts) in PR (§4). And therefore it is the basic principle of the fully realized state. Rousseau is given the credit for having been the first to seize this crucial principle

by adducing the will as the principle of the state, he is adducing a principle which has thought both for its form and its content, a principle indeed which is thinking itself, and not a principle, like gregarious instinct, for instance, or divine authority, which has thought as its form only.

(PR, § 258)

But while building on Kant, Hegel gives this principle of autonomy an entirely new twist. He generates out of it a new variant of the larger order which this modern consciousness started off by rejecting. In this way, he believes himself to have overcome the grievous dilemma which Kant’s theory runs into.

The problem with Kant’s criterion of rationality is that it has purchased radical autonomy at the price of emptiness. Once it is explained to us, we can see how the Platonic criterion of reason works to select some things as right and others as wrong, even though we may disagree with it, and reject its whole ontological base. The same goes for the utilitarian criterion. But Kant attempted to avoid any appeal to the way things are, either to an order of ideas, or a constellation of de facto desires. The criterion of the right is to be purely formal. Kant believed that this gave him a viable theory because he thought that the formal criterion would actually rule some actions in and others out. But the arguments to this effect are very shaky, and once one loses faith in them, one is left with a criterion which has no bite at all, which can allow anything as a morally possible action. Moral autonomy has been purchased at the price of vacuity.

This is a criticism that Hegel never tires of addressing to Kant. We will remember that his argument in Chapter VI, section 3 of the PhG turned partly on the vacuity of the Kantian criterion. But the point crops up elsewhere. In a work of the early 1800s ‘Über die wissenschaftlichen Behandlungsarten des Naturrechts’, Hegel takes issue directly with the example Kant uses in the Critique of Practical Reason (§4, Remark), that of a deposit which a dead man has left me. If there are no written instructions, so that no-one can find me out, am I justified in just appropriating it? Kant asks. Surely not, for a general rule to the effect that anybody can deny holding a deposit, when no-one can find him out, would destroy itself as a law, since it would end up destroying the practice of leaving deposits with others.

Hegel argues4 that there is no contradiction whatever here. Supposing that my action generalized would do away with the practice of leaving deposits, in what way does that contradict the rule of stealing them while I can? If the rule also enjoined me to preserve the practice, there would be contradiction, but it does not. We end up with a simple ‘tautology’, something like ‘generalized stealing of deposits is incompatible with the practice of leaving them’, or ‘generalized theft is incompatible with property’. But the problem remains entire whether we want to affirm property as a value, or generalized theft, or thorough-going communism.

The Kantian principle if it is to work in this and other cases is rather something of this kind: no maxim is acceptable, if general obedience to it would make it inapplicable by doing away with the reality it bears on. But this would make us reject as immoral such maxims as ‘help the poor’, ‘defend your country against its enemies’, and so on (op. cit. 345–5).

Hegel returns to this point in PR, § 135. The Kantian criterion can lead only to an ‘empty formalism’. There is no contradiction in the proposition that property should not exist. The right to property must be more concretely grounded.

Now Hegel claims to resolve Kant’s dilemma, because he will show how the concrete content of duty is deduced from the very idea of freedom itself. We already have a general idea of what he means by this, but before going on to see it in greater detail, we should note how this reproach of vacuity was central to Hegel’s critique of Kant, and of the whole revolutionary age.

Because he only has a formal notion of freedom, Kant cannot derive his notion of the polity from it. His political theory ends up borrowing from the utilitarians. Its input, we might say, is the utilitarian vision of a society of individuals each seeking happiness in his own way. The problem of politics is to find a way of limiting the negative freedom (Willkür) of each so that it can coexist with that of all others under a universal law. In other words Kant’s radical notion of freedom being purely formal and therefore vacuous cannot generate a new substantive vision of the polity in which it would be realized, one founded on goals derived intrinsically from the nature of the will itself, (‘der Wille...als an und für sich seiender, venünftiger...’) which would thus be unconditionally valid for men. So Kant’s political theory has to borrow its content from nature, as it were. It takes its start from men as individuals seeking particular goals, and the demands of morality and rationality, i.e., universality, only enter as restrictions and limitations (Beschränkungen) imposed on these individuals from outside. Rationality is not immanent, but an external, formal universality which demands only that the negative freedom of all individuals be made compatible (PR § 29).

Thus although Kant starts with a radically new conception of morality, his political theory is disappointingly familiar. It does not take us very far beyond utilitarianism, in that its main problem remains that of harmonizing individual wills.

This is undoubtedly a little unfair to Kant, as we shall note later on. But it seems even unfairer to Rousseau who is lumped together with Kant as the target of the same criticism, both in this paragraph (§29) and elsewhere.5 In § 258, Hegel complains that Rousseau sees will still as individual will, and thinks of the general will not as ‘the absolutely rational element in the will’ (das an und für sich Vernünftige des Willens), but only as the common element (das Gemeinschaftliche) which emerges from the conscious individual wills. The result is that the state is ultimately based on arbitrary decisions and consent (Willkür, Meinung und beliebige, ausdrückliche Einwilligung).

As it stands this certainly fails to do justice to Rousseau. His volonté générale was certainly meant to be more and other than the common element of everyone’s particular will, and the task of the contract was not to bring these particular wills into agreement. But a clue to what Hegel is driving at is provided by the reference in both paragraphs (§§29 and 258) to the fearful destruction wrought by the French Revolution, which here as elsewhere Hegel sees as following logically on the principles of Rousseau.

For in fact, the vacuity of formal freedom can have another quite different outcome than the one ascribed above to Kant. There we saw the theory of autonomy having to fall back on utilitarianism to define the problem of political life. But it is possible for theorists of radical autonomy to feel this lack themselves, and to yearn for a society which would go beyond the struggle and compromise of particular wills and attain an integral expression of freedom. This is the drive for ‘absolute freedom’ which Hegel described in the PhG and which he saw in the Jacobin period of Revolutionary terror.

But as we saw, the curse of vacuity haunts this enterprise as well. Its aim is to found society on no particular interest or traditional positive principle, but on freedom alone. But this, being empty, gives no basis for a new articulated structure of society. It only enjoins to destroy the existing articulations, and any new ones which threaten to arise. The drive to absolute freedom thus becomes the fury of destruction, ‘and the experiment ended in the maximum of frightfulness and terror’ (§258).

It seems strange, however, to link this Terror, which sacrificed the individual to the general will, to a theory which is said still to define will as individual. But I think what Hegel was really driving at was something else, which was not very perspicuously put in these passages. It is that Rousseau, Kant, both revolutionary and liberal protagonists of radical autonomy, all defined freedom as human freedom, the will as human will. Hegel on the other hand believed himself to have shown that man reaches his basic identity in seeing himself as a vehicle of Geist. If the substance of the will is thought or reason, and if the will is only free when it follows nothing else but its own thought, the thought or reason in question turns out not to be that of man alone, but rather that of the cosmic spirit which posits the universe.

This transforms the situation. The vacuity which bedevilled the theory of radical autonomy is overcome. The dilemma of radical freedom can be restated succinctly as follows: if freedom is to renounce all heteronomy, any determination of the will by particular desires, traditional principle or external authority, then freedom seems incompatible with any rational action whatsoever. For there do not seem to be any grounds of action left, which are not wholly vacuous, that is which would actually rule some actions in and others out, and which are not also heteronomous.

But everything changes if the will whose autonomy men must realize is not that of man alone but of Geist. Its content is the Idea which produces a differentiated world out of itself. So that there is no longer a lack of determining grounds of action.

To put this less succinctly, Hegel’s free rational will escapes vacuity because unlike Kant’s it does not remain merely universal but produces a particular content out of itself. But this is its prerogative not qua human only, but rather that of the cosmic subject. It is the absolute Idea which deploys a differentiated world. Human rational will finds a content not by stripping itself of all particularity in the attempt to attain a freedom and universality which can only be formal, but by discovering its links to cosmic reason, and hence coming to discern what aspects of our lives as particular beings reflect the truly concrete universal which is the Idea. What reason and freedom enjoin on man’s will is to further and sustain that structure of things which so reveals itself to be the adequate expression of the Idea.

This means first, as we saw above, that society must be such that men relate to it as to a larger life in which they are immersed. In other words, the demands of freedom on this reading take us beyond the atomistic forms of liberalism where the individual and his goals are of ultimate importance, and the task of society is to permit their fulfilment along with those of others.

And this in turn dictates a certain structure of society. It must be such that the various moments of the Concept, immediate unity, separation, and mediated unity, all reach full and compatible expression. We shall see later how Hegel gives concrete content to this seemingly abstract requirement, which is made the ground for the essential articulation of the state into ‘estates’ (Stände) and into levels of society (family, civil society, state).

The demands of reason are thus that men live in a state articulated according to the Concept, and that they relate to it not just as individuals whose interests are served by this collectively established machinery, but more essentially as participants in a larger life. And this larger life deserves their ultimate allegiance because it is the expression of the very foundation of things, the Concept. Freedom has been given a very concrete content indeed.

But in this Hegel has brought off an extraordinary tour de force. For this relation of man to society is parallel to the pre-modern one. Before the revolution of modern subjectivity men were induced to revere the structures of their society: monarchy, aristocracy, priestly hierarchy, or whatever, on the grounds that these reflected the will of God or the order of being, in short, the foundation of things to which man owes ultimate allegiance. The king was to be obeyed because he was God’s anointed, more, he was the expression in the polity of what God was in the universe. Now this mode of thought returns in the most surprising way, growing out of the most extreme expression of modern self-defining subjectivity, the radical notion of autonomy.

No wonder Hegel has been difficult to classify on the liberal/conservative spectrum. For he rehabilitates the notion of a cosmic order as a cornerstone of political theory, e.g., he speaks of the state as divine. And this kind of thing we think of as the hallmark of conservative, even reactionary thought. But this order is utterly unlike those of the tradition. There is nothing in it which is not transparently dictated by reason itself. It is thus not an order beyond man which he must simply accept. Rather it is one which flows from his own nature properly understood. Hence it is centred on autonomy, since to be governed by a law which emanates from oneself is to be free. The order thus gives a central place to the autonomous, rational individual. Hegel’s political theory is quite without precedent or parallel. The attempt to classify it by picking out liberal or conservative shibboleths can just lead to laughable misinterpretations.6

Thus Hegel’s answer to the vacuity of Kant’s moral theory is to deduce the content of duty out of the idea of freedom. But this is a feasible operation because he is not talking of the idea of merely human freedom, but rather of the cosmic Idea. From this he can derive the notion of the kind of society that men should belong to. It is this vision of society which then can give concrete content to moral obligation which enjoins us to further and sustain its structures and live according to its precepts. Morality is only given a content via the notion of a whole society. Thus

An immanent and consistent ‘doctrine of duties’ can be nothing except the serial exposition of the relationships which are necessitated by the Idea of freedom, and are therefore realized across their whole extent, that is, in the state.

(PR, § 148)7

Hence rationality becomes a substantive criterion for Hegel both in morals and politics, and this in a manner original with him. His conception has some affinities with Plato, since it does involve the idea of a cosmic order. But it also owes a great deal to Kant, since it is built on the requirement of radical autonomy, that the will should obey nothing but itself, its own immanent rationality. It manages somehow, as we saw, to combine both, and in this its striking originality consists.

As the criterion of rationality actually applies to Hegel’s politics, it is quite complex. It has some of its applications in common with Kant’s. For in fact this latter is richer in its consequences for political theory than Hegel sometimes allows.8

First of all, rationality requires that man be treated as a rational subject, as, in Kant’s formulation, an end, and not only as a means. And in political terms, this means that the modern state must recognize the rights of the autonomous individual. It cannot accept slavery. It must respect property, conscience (PR, § 137), the free choice of a career (PR, § 206), religious confession (PR, § 270), and so on.

Secondly, rationality, even in its formal Kantian definition, requires that the state be ruled by law (PR, preface), and not by arbitrary caprice; and that the law treat all alike, which means that to the extent that it emanates from men at all, it must in an important sense emanate from all alike.

These are the corollaries which flow from the liberal, Kantian criterion of rationality. Hegel adds to them his own, that political society should realize and express the Idea.

But we can still see the justice in Hegel’s claim that Kant’s criterion does not take us very far beyond the utilitarian Enlightenment. The first two principles tell us how individuals should be treated, and give us a general, formal characterization of the good society, that it should be based on law. But only the third, Hegel’s criterion, enables us to derive the actual shape this society should take. Kant’s moral theory remained at the edges of politics, as it were, setting limits beyond which states or individuals should not tread. For Hegel, in contrast, morality can only receive a concrete content in politics, in the design of the society we have to further and sustain.

This set of obligations which we have to further and sustain a society founded on the Idea is what Hegel calls ‘Sittlichkeit’. This has been variously translated in English, as ‘ethical life’, ‘objective ethics’, ‘concrete ethics’, but no translation can capture the sense of this term of art, and I propose to use the original here. ‘Sittlichkeit’ is the usual German term for ‘ethics’, with the same kind of etymological origin, in the term ‘Sitten’ which we might translate ‘customs’. But Hegel gives it a special sense, in contrast to ‘Momlität’ (which of course has a parallel etymological origin in ‘mores’, although being Latin it would not be so evident to German readers).

‘ Sittlichkeit ‘refers to the moral obligations I have to an ongoing community of which I am part. These obligations are based on established norms and uses, and that is why the etymological root in ‘Sitten’ is important for Hegel’s use.9 The crucial characteristic of Sittlichkeit is that it enjoins us to bring about what already is. This is a paradoxical way of putting it, but in fact the common life which is the basis of my sittlich obligation is already there in existence. It is in virtue of its being an ongoing affair that I have these obligations; and my fulfilment of these obligations is what sustains it and keeps it in being. Hence in Sittlichkeit, there is no gap between what ought to be and what is, between Sollen and Sein.

With Moralitât, the opposite holds. Here we have an obligation to realize something which does not exist. What ought to be contrasts with what is. And connected with this, the obligation holds of me not in virtue of being part of a larger community life, but as an individual rational will.

Hegel’s critique of Kant can then be put in this way: Kant identifies ethical obligation with Moralität,10 and cannot get beyond this. For he presents an abstract, formal notion of moral obligation, which holds of man as an individual, and which being defined in contrast to nature is in endless opposition to what is.

We can see how all of Hegel’s reproaches against Kant’s moral philosophy are systematically connected. Because it remained with a purely formal notion of reason, it could not provide a content to moral obligation. Because it would not accept the only valid content, which comes from an ongoing society to which we belong, it remained an ethic of the individual. Because it shied away from that larger life of which we are a part, it saw the right as forever opposed to the real; morality and nature are always at loggerheads.

The doctrine of Sittlichkeit is that morality reaches its completion in a community. This both gives obligation its definitive content, as well as realizing it, so that the gap between Sollen and Sein is made up. Hegel started off as we saw, following Kant in distinguishing will and freedom from nature. But the fulfilment of freedom is when nature (here society, which started in a raw, primitive form) is made over to the demands of reason.

Because the realization of the Idea requires that man be part of a larger life in a society, moral life reaches its highest realization in Sittlichkeit. This highest realization is an achievement, of course, it is not present throughout history, and there are even periods where public life has been so emptied of spirit, that Moralität expresses something higher. But the fulfilment of morality comes in a realized Sittlichkeit.

This is the point where Hegel runs counter to the moral instinct of liberalism then and now. Between obligations which are founded on our membership of some community and those which are not so contingent we tend to think of the latter as transcending the former, as the truly universal moral obligations. Hegel’s reversal of the order and his exalted view of political society is what has inspired accusations of ‘Prussianism’, state-worship, even proto-Fascism. We can see already how wide of the mark these are. We tend to think of Moralität as more fundamental because we see the moral man as being ever in danger of being asked by his community to do the unconscionable. And particularly so in an age of nationalism. We are probably right in feeling this in our age, but it was not what Hegel foresaw. The community which is the locus of our fullest moral life is a state which comes close to a true embodiment of the Idea. Hegel thought that the states of his day were building towards that. He was wrong, and we shall discuss this more later on. But it is ludicrous to attribute a view like ‘my government right or wrong’ to Hegel, or to think that he would have approved the kind of blind following of orders of German soldiers and functionaries under the Third Reich, which was a time if ever there was one when Moralität had the higher claim.

We should not forget that two of Hegel’s ‘heroes’, i.e., pivotal figures, in history are Socrates and Jesus, both of whom undermined or broke with the Sittlichkeit of their people, and struck off on their own. Hegel’s point is, however, that man’s (and Geis’s) true realization cannot come like this. No matter what great spiritual truths a man discovered, they could not be made real, i.e., embodied, if he remains on his own. As an individual he depends on his society in a host of ways, and if it is unregenerate, then he cannot realize the good. If he does not want to compromise his truth and corrupt his message, then he must either withdraw, and/or offer a challenge to his society which will earn him the fate of Christ or Socrates.

Full realization of freedom requires a society for the Aristotelian reason that a society is the minimum self-sufficient human reality. In putting Sittlichkeit at the apex, Hegel is – consciously – following Aristotle. And in following Aristotle, the ancient Greek world. For the last time that the world saw an effortless and undivided Sittlichkeit was among the Greeks. Hegel’s notion of Sittlichkeit is in part a rendering of that expressive unity which his whole generation saw in the Greek polis, where – it was believed – men had seen the collective life of their city as the essence and meaning of their own lives, had sought their glory in its public life, their rewards in power and reputation within it, and immortality in its memory. It was his expression for that vertu which Montesquieu had seen as the mainspring of republics. In common with his generation he recognized that this Sittlichkeit was lost forever in its original form, but along with many of his contemporaries he aspired to see it reborn in a new way.

2
The idea that our highest and most complete moral existence is one we can only attain to as members of a community obviously takes us beyond the contract theory of modern natural law, or the utilitarian conception of society as an instrument of the general happiness. For these societies are not the focus of independent obligations, let alone the highest claims which can be made on us. Their existence simply gives a particular shape to pre-existing moral obligations, e.g., the keeping of promises, or the furtherance of the greatest happiness of the greatest number. The doctrine which puts Sittlichkeit at the apex of moral life requires a notion of society as a larger community life, to recall the expression used above, in which man participates as a member.

Now this notion displaces the centre of gravity, as it were, from the individual onto the community, which is seen as the locus of a life or subjectivity, of which the individuals are phases. The community is an embodiment of Geist, and a fuller, more substantial embodiment than the individual. This idea of a subjective life beyond the individual has been the source of much resistance to Hegel’s philosophy. For it has seemed to the common sense at least of the Anglo-Saxon world (nurtured by a certain philosophical tradition) as both wildly extravagant in a speculative sense, and morally very dangerous in its ‘Prussian’ or even ‘Fascist’ consequences, sacrificing the individual and his freedom on the altar of some ‘higher’ communal deity. Before going further, therefore, we should examine this notion of the society and the relation of individuals to it. We shall see, indeed, that Hegel’s notion of objective Geist is not without difficulty; but the extravagance is not where the atomistic mentality of the empiricist world thought it was.

Hegel uses a number of terms to characterize this relation of man to the community.

One of the most common is ‘substance’. The state, or the people is the ‘substance’ of individuals. This idea is clearly expressed in the Encyclopaedia.

The substance which knows itself free, in which absolute ‘Ought’ is equally well being, has reality as the spirit of a people. The abstract diremption of this spirit is the individuation into persons, of whose independent existence spirit is the inner power and necessity. But the person as thinking intelligence knows this substance as his own essence – in this conviction [Gesinnung] he ceases to be a mere accident of it – rather he looks on it as his absolute and final goal existing in reality, as something which is attained in the here and now, while at the same time he brings it about through his activity, but as something which in fact simply is.

(EG, § 514)11

We can notice here at the end a reference to that basic feature of Sittlichkeit, that it provides a goal which is at the same time already realized, which is brought about, and yet is. But what is worth noticing here is the set of related concepts which help to explain ‘substance’. The community, says Hegel, is also ‘essence’, and also ‘final goal’ for the individuals.

The notion behind ‘substance’ and ‘essence’ is that the individuals only are what they are by their inherence in the community. This idea is put in a passage of VG.

Everything that man is he owes to the state; only in it can he find his essence. All value that a man has, all spiritual reality, he has only through the state.

(VG, 111)

Or more direcdy

the individual is an individual in this substance...No individual can step beyond [it]; he can separate himself certainly from other particular individuals, but not from the

Volksgeist. (VG, 59–60)

The notion behind ‘final goal’ (Endzweck) seems to be more sinister, for it seems to imply that individuals only exist to serve the state as some pitiless Moloch. This seems even more clearly to be the message of PR, § 258

this substantial unity is an absolute unmoved end in itself, in which freedom comes into its supreme right. On the other hand this final end has supreme right against the individual, whose supreme duty is to be a member of the state.

But this reading is based on a serious misinterpretation. Hegel denies that the state exists for the individuals, in other words he rejects the Enlightenment utilitarian idea that the state has only an instrumental function, that the ends it must serve are those of individuals. But he cannot really accept the inverse proposition.

The state is not there for the sake of the citizens; one could say, it is the goal and they are its instruments. But this relation of ends and means is quite inappropriate here. For the state is not something abstract, standing over against the citizens; but rather they are moments as in organic life, where no member is end and none means...The essence of the state is ethical life [die sittliche Lebendigkeit].

(VG, 112)

Rather we see here that the notion of ends and means gives way to the image of a living being. The state or the community has a higher life; its parts are related as the parts of an organism.12 Thus the individual is not serving an end separate from him, rather he is serving a larger goal which is the ground of his identity, for he only is the individual he is in this larger life. We have gone beyond the opposition self-goal/other-goal.

Hegel adds to this notion of the community as living that of the community as ‘self-consciousness’. And it is this, together with the use of the words ‘Geist’, ‘Volksgeist’ which has given rise to the idea that the Hegelian state or community is a super-individual. But in the passage of VG where he introduces the terms ‘self-consciousness’, Hegel makes clear that he is not talking about it in connection with Volksgeister in the sense that it applies to individuals. Rather it is a ‘philosophical concept’ (VG, 61). Like any Geist larger than the individual it only has existence through the vehicle of individual concrete subjects.13 It is thus not a subject like them.

But why does Hegel want to speak of a spirit which is larger than the individual? What does it mean to say that the individual is part of, inheres in, a larger life; and that he is only what he is by doing so?

These ideas only appear mysterious because of the powerful hold on us of atomistic prejudices, which have been very important in modern political thought and culture. We can think that the individual is what he is in abstraction from his community only if we are thinking of him qua organism. But when we think of a human being, we do not simply mean a living organism, but a being who can think, feel, decide, be moved, respond, enter into relations with others; and all this implies a language, a related set of ways of experiencing the world, of interpreting his feelings, understanding his relation to others, to the past, the future, the absolute, and so on. It is the particular way he situates himself within this cultural world that we call his identity.

But now a language, and the related set of distinctions underlying our experience and interpretation, is something that can only grow in and be sustained by a community. In that sense, what we are as human beings, we are only in a cultural community. Perhaps, once we have fully grown up in a culture, we can leave it and still retain much of it. But this kind of case is exceptional, and in an important sense marginal. Emigrés cannot fully live their culture, and are always forced to take on something of the ways of the new society they have entered. The life of a language and culture is one whose locus is larger than that of the individual. It happens in the community. The individual possesses this culture, and hence his identity, by participating in this larger life.

When I say that a language and the related distinctions can only be sustained by a community, I am not thinking only of language as a medium of communication; so that our experience could be entirely private, and just need a public medium to be communicated from one to another. Rather the fact is that our experience is what it is, is shaped in part, by the way we interpret it; and this has a lot to do with the terms which are available to us in our culture. But there is more; many of our most important experiences would be impossible outside of society, for they relate to objects which are social. Such are, for instance, the experience of participating in a rite, or of taking part in the political life of our society, or of rejoicing at the victory of the home team, or of national mourning for a dead hero; and so on. All these experiences and emotions have objects which are essentially social, i.e., would not be outside of (this) society.

So the culture which lives in our society shapes our private experience and constitutes our public experience, which in turn interacts profoundly with the private. So that it is no extravagant proposition to say that we are what we are in virtue of participating in the larger life of our society – or at least, being immersed in it, if our relationship to it is unconscious and passive, as is often the case.

But of course Hegel is saying something more than this. For this inescapable relation to the culture of my society does not rule out the most extreme alienation. This comes about when the public experience of my society ceases to have any meaning for me.

Far from wishing to deny this possibility, Hegel was one of the first to develop a theory of alienation. The point is that the objects of public experience, rite, festival, election, etc. are not like facts of nature. For they are not entirely separable from the experience they give rise to. They are partly constituted by the ideas and interpretations which underlie them. A given social practice, like voting in the ecclesia, or in a modern election, is what it is because of a set of commonly understood ideas and meanings, by which the depositing of stones in an urn, or the marking of bits of paper, counts as the making of a social decision. These ideas about what is going on are essential to define the institution. They are essential if there is to be voting here, and not some quite other activity which could be carried on by putting stones in the urns.

Now these ideas are not universally acceptable or even understandable. They involve a certain view of man, society, and decision, for instance, which may seem evil or unintelligible to other societies. To take a social decision by voting implies that it is right, appropriate and intelligible to build the community decision out of a concatenation of individual decisions. In some societies, e.g., many traditional village societies throughout the world, social decisions can (could) only be taken by consensus. An atomistic decision procedure of this kind is tantamount to dissolving the social bond. Whatever else it is it could not be a social decision.

Thus a certain view of man and his relation to society is embedded in some of the practices and institutions of a society. So that we can think of these as expressing certain ideas. And indeed, they may be the only, or the most adequate expression of these ideas, if the society has not developed a relatively articulate and accurate theory about itself. The ideas which underlie a certain practice and make it what it is, e.g., those which make the marking of papers the taking of a social decision, may not be spelled out adequately in propositions about man, will, society, and so on. Indeed, an adequate theoretical language may be as yet undeveloped.

In this sense we can think of the institutions and practices of a society as a kind of language in which its fundamental ideas are expressed. But what is ‘said’ in this language is not ideas which could be in the minds of certain individuals only, they are rather common to a society, because embedded in its collective life, in practices and institutions which are of the society indivisibly. In these the spirit of the society is in a sense objectified. They are, to use Hegel’s term, ‘objective spirit’.

These institutions and practices make up the public life of a society. Certain norms are implicit in them, which they demand to be maintained and properly lived out. Because of what voting is as a concatenating procedure of social decision, certain norms about falsification, the autonomy of the individual decision, etc. flow inescapably from it. The norms of a society’s public life are the content of Sittlichkeit.

We can now see better what Hegel means when he speaks of the norms or ends of society as sustained by our action, and yet as already there, so that the member of society ‘brings them about through his activity, but as something which rather simply is’ (EG, § 514). For these practices and institutions are maintained only by ongoing human activity in conformity to them; and yet they are in a sense there already before this activity, and must be, for it is only the ongoing practice which defines what the norm is our future action must seek to sustain. This is especially the case if there is as yet no theoretical formulation of the norm, as there was not in Hegel’s view in the Greek city-states at their apogee. The Athenian acted ‘as it were, out of instinct’ (VG, 115), his Sittlichkeit was a ‘second nature’. But even if there is a theory, it cannot substitute for the practice as a criterion, for it is unlikely that any formulation can entirely render what is involved in a social practice of this kind.

Societies refer to theoretical ‘value’ formulations as their norms rather than to practices, when they are trying to make themselves over to meet an unrealized standard; e.g., they are trying to ‘build socialism’, or become fully ‘democratic’. But these goals are, of course, of the domain of Moralität Sittlichkeit presupposes that the living practices are an adequate ‘statement’ of the basic norms, although in the limit case of the modern philosophy of the state, Hegel sees the theoretical formulation as catching up. Hence we see the importance of Hegel’s insistence that the end sought by the highest ethics is already realized. It means that the highest norms are to be discovered in the real, that the real is rational, and that we are to turn away from chimaeric attempts to construct a new society from a blue-print. Hegel strongly opposes those who hold

that a philosophy of state...[has]...the task of discovering and promulgating still another theory...In examining this idea and the activity in conformity with it, we might suppose that no state or constitution has ever existed in the world at all, but that nowadays.. .we had to start all over again from the beginning, and that the ethical world had just been waiting for such present-day projects, proofs and investigations.

(PR, preface, 4)

The happiest, unalienated life for man, which the Greeks enjoyed, is where the norms and ends expressed in the public life of a society are the most important ones by which its members define their identity as human beings. For then the institutional matrix in which they cannot help living is not felt to be foreign. Rather it is the essence, the ‘substance’ of the self.

Thus in universal spirit each man has self-certainty, the certainty that he will find nothing other in existing reality than himself.

(PhG, 258)

And because this substance is sustained by the activity of the citizens, they see it as their work.

This substance is also the universal work [Werk], which creates itself through the action of each and all as their unity and equality, because it is Being-for-self [Fürsichsein], the self, the act of doing [das Tun].

(PhG, 314)

To live in a state of this kind is to be free. The opposition between social necessity and individual freedom disappears.

The rational is necessary as what belongs to substance, and we are free in so far as we recognize it as law and follow it as the substance of our own essence; objective and subjective will are then reconciled and form one and the same untroubled whole. (VG, 115)

But alienation arises when the goals, norms or ends which define the common practices or institutions begin to seem irrelevant or even monstrous, or when the norms are redefined so that the practices appear a travesty of them. A number of public religious practices have suffered the first fate in history; they have ‘gone dead’ on subsequent generations, and may even be seen as irrational or blasphemous. To the extent that they remain part of the public ritual there is widespread alientation in society – we can think of contemporary societies like Spain, which remains officially Catholic while a good part of the population is rapidly anti-clerical; or communist societies, which have a public religion of atheism, even though many of their citizens believe in God.

But the democratic practices of Western society seem to be suffering something like the second fate in our time. Many people can no longer accept the legitimacy of voting and the surrounding institutions, elections, parliaments, etc., as vehicles of social decision. They have redrawn their conception of the relation of individual to society, so that the mediation and distance which any large-scale voting system produces between individual decision and social outcome seems unacceptable. Nothing can claim to be a real social decision which is not arrived at in a full and intense discussion in which all participants are fully conscious of what is at stake. Decisions made by elected representatives are branded as sham, as manipulation masquerading as consensus. With this redefinition of the norm of collective decision (that is, of a decision made by people, and not just for them), our present representative institutions begin to be portrayed as an imposture; and a subtantial proportion of the population is alienated from them.

In either case, norms as expressed in public practices cease to hold our allegiance. They are either seen as irrelevant or are decried as usurpation. This is alienation. When this happens men have to turn elsewhere to define what is centrally important to them. Sometimes they turn to another society, for instance a smaller, more intense religious community. But another possibility, which had great historical importance in Hegel’s eyes, is that they strike out on their own and define their identity as individuals. Individualism comes, as Hegel puts it in the VG, when men cease to identify with the community’s life, when they ‘reflect’, that is, turn back on themselves, and see themselves most importantly as individuals with individual goals. This is the moment of dissolution of a Volk and its life.

What happens here is that the individual ceases to define his identity principally by the public experience of the society. On the contrary, the most meaningful experience, which seems to him most vital, to touch most the core of his being, is private. Public experience seems to him secondary, narrow, and parochial, merely touching a part of himself. Should that experience try to make good its claim to centrality as before, the individual enters into conflict with it and has to fight it.

This kind of shift has of course been instantiated many times in history, but the paradigm event of this kind for Hegel occurs with the break-up of the Greek city-state. Thus in the Greek polis, men identified themselves with its public life; its common experiences were for them the paradigm ones. Their most basic, unchallengeable values were those embodied in this public life, and hence their major duty and virtue was to continue and sustain this life. In other words, they lived fully by their Sittlichkeit. But the public life of each of these poleis was narrow and parochial. It was not in conformity with universal reason. With Socrates arises the challenge of a man who cannot agree to base his life on the parochial, on the merely given, but requires a foundation in universal reason. Socrates himself expresses a deep contradiction since he accepts the idea of Sittlichkeit, of laws that one should hold allegiance to; he derives this from universal reason as well. And yet because of his allegiance to reason he cannot live with the actual laws of Athens. Rather he undermines them, he corrupts the youth not to take them as final, but to question them. He has to be put to death, a death which he accepts because of his allegiance to the laws.

But now a new type of man arises who cannot identify with this public life. He begins to relate principally not to the public life but to his own grasp of universal reason. The norms that he now feels compelling are quite unsubstantiated in any reality; they are ideas that go beyond the real. The reflecting individual is in the domain of Moralität.

Of course, even the self-conscious individual related to some society. Men thought of themselves qua moral beings as belonging to some community, the city of men and Gods of the Stoics, the city of God of the Christian. But they saw this city as quite other than and beyond the earthly city. And the actual community of philosophers or believers in which they worked out and sustained the language by which they identified themselves was scattered and powerless. The common life on which their identity as rational or God-fearing individuals was founded was or could be very attenuated. So that what was most important in a man’s life was that he did or thought as an individual, not his participation in the public life of a real historical community. (This was not really true of the Christian church for which the Eucharist was of central importance, but certainly applies to the sage of the late ancient world.)

In any case, the community of the wise, as that of the saints, was without external, self-subsistent existence in history. Rather, the public realm was given over to private, unjustified power. This is Hegel’s usual description of the ancient period of universal empires which succeeded the city-state, particularly the Roman empire. The unity and fulfilment of Sittlichkeit, lost from this world, was transposed out of it into an ethereal beyond.

What then is Hegel saying with his thesis of the primacy of Sittlichkeit, and the related notion of the community as ‘ethical substance’, a spiritual life in which man must take part? We can express it in three propositions, put in ascending order of contestability. First, that what is most important for man can only be attained in relation to the public life of a community, not in the private self-definition of the alienated individual. Second, this community must not be a merely partial one, e.g., a conventicle or private association, whose life is conditioned, controlled and limited by a larger society. It must be co-terminous with the minimum self-sufficient human reality, the state. The public life which expresses at least some of our important norms must be that of a state.

Thirdly, the public life of the state has this crucial importance for men because the norms and ideas it expresses are not just human inventions. On the contrary, the state expresses the Idea, the ontological structure of things. In the final analysis it is of vital importance because it is one of the indispensable ways in which man recovers his essential relation to this ontological structure, the other being in the modes of consciousness which Hegel calls ‘absolute spirit’, and this real relation through the life of the community is essential to the completion of the return to conscious identity between man and the Absolute (which means also the Absolute’s self-identity).

Obviously these three propositions are linked. The third gives the underlying ground of the first and second. If man achieves his true identity as a vehicle of cosmic spirit, and if one of the indispensable media in which this identity is expressed is the public life of his political society, then evidently, it is essential that he come to identify himself in relation to this public life. He must transcend the alienation of a private or sectarian identity, since these can never link him fully to the Absolute.

This is the complex of ideas which lies behind the Hegelian use of terms like ‘substance’, ‘essence’, ‘Endzweck’, ‘Selbstzweck’ in speaking of the community: First of all that the set of practices and institutions which make up the public life of the community express the most important norms, most central to its members’ identity, so that they are only sustained in their identity by their participation in these practices and institutions, which in their turn they perpetuate by this participation. Secondly, that the community concerned is the state, that is, a really self-sufficient community. And thirdly, that this community has this central role because it expresses the Idea, the formula of rational necessity underlying man and his world.

Thus what is strange and contestable in Hegel’s theory of the state is not the idea of a larger life in which men are immersed, or the notion that the public life of a society expresses certain ideas, which are thus in a sense the ideas of the society as a whole and not just of the individuals, so that we can speak of a people as having a certain ‘spirit’. For throughout most of human history men have lived most intensely in relation to the meanings expressed in the public life of their societies. Only an exaggerated atomism could make the condition of alienated men seem the inescapable human norm.

But where Hegel does make a substantial claim which is not easy to grant is in his basic ontological view, that man is the vehicle of cosmic spirit, and the corollary, that the state expresses the underlying formula of necessity by which this spirit posits the world.

In other words, the idea of a ‘Volksgeist’, the spirit of a people, whose ideas are expressed in their common institutions, by which they define their identity, this is intelligible enough. And something like it is essential if we are to understand what has gone on in human history. What is harder to credit is the thesis that men – and hence in their own way these Volksgeister – are vehicles of a cosmic spirit which is returning to self-consciousness through man.

Thus there is no specially odd Hegelian doctrine of a super-individual subject of society, as is often believed. There is only a very difficult doctrine of a cosmic subject whose vehicle is man. This is woven into a theory of man in society which by itself is far from implausible or bizarre. Indeed, it is much superior to the atomistic conceptions of some of Hegel’s liberal opponents.

But it is his ontological view which makes Hegel take a turn which goes against the mainstream of liberal thought. This latter tends to assume that individualism is the ultimate in human evolution. Even if civilized men are not alienated from the state, still their highest foci of identity are thought to be beyond it, in religion, or some personal moral ideal, or the human race as a whole. Thus the condition in which men identify themselves primarily in relation to the common life of their society must be a more primitive stage, and especially where this common life is thought to embody cosmic or religious significance. For this kind of society to succeed an age of individualism could only represent regression. And this is, of course, why Hegel has been harshly judged by those in this strand of liberalism (which does not exhaust what can justifiably be called liberal thought: Montesquieu, de Tocqueville, Herder, von Humboldt, and others have been concerned about the quality of public life, with which men must identify themselves).

But the attempt to understand Hegel within the terms of this liberal tradition has just led to distortion. A notorious example is Hegel’s doctrine of the state. In the atomist liberal tradition, ‘state’ can only mean something like ‘organs of government’. To talk of these as ‘essence’ or ‘final goal’ of the citizens can only mean subjection to irresponsible tyranny. But what Hegel means by ‘state’ is the politically organized community. His model is not the Machstaat of Frederick the Great, which he never admired,14 but the Greek polis. Thus his ideal is not a condition in which individuals are means to an end, but rather a community in which like a living organism, the distinction between means and ends is overcome, everything is both means and end. In other words the state should be an application of the category of internal teleology (cf. quote from VG, 112 above, p. 380).

Thus the state which is fully rational will be one which expresses in its institutions and practices the most important ideas and norms which its citizens recognize, and by which they define their identity. And this will be the case because the state expresses the articulations of the Idea, which rational man comes to see as the formula of necessity underlying all things, which is destined to come to self-consciousness in man. So that the rational state will restore Sittlichkeit, the embodiment of the highest norms in an ongoing public life. It will recover what was lost with the Greeks, but on a higher level. For the fully developed state will incorporate the principle of the individual rational will judging by universal criteria, the very principle that undermined and eventually destroyed the Greek polis.

This integration of individuality and Sittlichkeit is a requirement we can deduce from the Idea. But this is also Hegel’s way of formulating and answering the yearning of his age to unite somehow the radical moral autonomy of Kant and the expressive unity of the Greek polis. Hegel’s answer to this conundrum was, as we saw, an extraordinary and original combination of the ultra-modern aspiration to autonomy, and a renewed vision of cosmic order as the foundation of society; a derivation, we might say, of cosmic order from the idea of radical autonomy itself, via a displacement of its centre of gravity from man to Geist. This synthesis he saw as the goal of history. Let us turn now to see how it develops in history.

 

 

1 ‘Es ist der Gang Gottes in der Welt, daß der Staat ist.’ Addition to PR, § 258. This was first mistranslated as ‘The state is the march of God through the world’, and this has been frequendy quoted as a pièce à conviction in the indictment of Hegel as an anti-liberal apologist of ‘Prussianism’. For the mistranslations and their effect, see w. Kaufmann’s introduction to the book he edited, Hegel’s Political Philosophy, New York, Atherton Press, 1970.

2 Critique of Practical Reason, § 5.

3 Of course, ‘nature’ can also be used in a different sense, in which we mean the concept of a thing, in which case, there is a ‘nature’ of spirit. Hegel uses this expression in the passage just referred to: ‘Die Natur des Geistes...’ This shows the filiation of Hegel’s thought to Aristotle’s, in spite of, or rather beyond his espousal of the modern radical autonomy.

4 Schriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie, ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923, 349 ff.

5 Cf. PR, § 258; SW, XIX, 528.

6 These unfortunately abound in the anglo-saxon world. The latest one has been perpetrated by Sidney Hook. Cf. his contributions to the volume edited by Walter Kaufmann, Hegel’s Political Philosophy, New York, Atherton Press, 1970.

7 Knox translation slightly amended.

8 Kant’s theory can in fact largely compensate for the vacuity of the universalizability criterion by certain other consequences of the aspiration to radical autonomy. For this also says something about the way men should be treated, and the kinds of rules they should be subject to.

9 Cf. Schriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie, ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923, p. 388.

10 Once again, this is Hegel’s term of art; Kant himself used the usual word ‘Sittlichkeit’ in his works on ethics.

11 Cf. also PR, §§ 145, 156, 258.

12 In the language of the Logic, the category of External Teleology is inadequate here. The state can only be understood by Internal Teleology.

13 Thus in PR, § 258, Hegel speaks of the state possessing ‘the actuality of the substantial will... in the particular self-consciousness once that consciousness has been raised to consciousness of its universality’ (my italics).

14 Ina work of the early 1800s, which has been published since his death under the tide, The German Constitution, Hegel expresses his opposition to the modern theory that a state should be a ‘machine with a single spring which imparts movement to all the rest of the infinite wheelwork’ (Schriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie, ed. G. Lasson, Leipzig 1923, p. 28; Hegels Political Writings, translated T. M. Knox, ed. Z. A. Pelczynski, Oxford 1964, p. 161). Prussia, as well as revolutionary France, is cited as an example later in this passage. (Schriften 31, Political Writings 163–4. Cf. discussion in Schlomo Avineri, Hegels Theory of the Modern State, Cambridge 1970, 47–9).

 
    