## CHAPTER V
## Self-consciousness
 

 

1
In the dialectic of consciousness, the tension lay between a certain norm of knowledge and what we actually are able to know in attempting to fulfil it. With self-consciousness, the dialectic will be between our idea of ourselves, what we claim to be, and what we actually are. These are the two moments Hegel calls self-certainty and truth. In the earlier dialectic the key notion was knowledge; here the centre of interest shifts to desire and its fulfilment. In our notion of ourselves, the object of our self-certainty is not something towards which we are neutral; on the contrary we are passionately attached to it. When our truth belies this and forces us on to another model of self-certainty, the transition is not made without pain.

And this transition itself is of a different kind. It must not be seen in intellectual terms, that a certain notion of self becomes untenable and has to be abandoned. Rather it is that the attempt to act out a certain idea of ourselves leads to consequences, in which the original idea is certainly undermined because the goal is not reached, but which give rise to the next stage not so much by refuting the previous self-certainty as by the creation of a new situation for man.

The dialectic of self-consciousness is thus a dialectic of human longing and aspiration, and their vicissitudes. What underlies it? What is the form of aspiration, the self-certainty, which can ultimately be fulfilled and which will bring the dialectic to a close?

What is aimed at is integral expression, a consummation where the external reality which embodies us and on which we depend is fully expressive of us and contains nothing alien. This goal, which we can call a state of total integrity, is identified by Hegel with his conception of infinity, a condition in which the subject is not limited by anything outside. It is this longing for total integrity which for Hegel underlies the striving of self-consciousness, at first after crude and unrealizable versions of the goal, then when man has been educated and elevated by conflict and contradiction, after the real thing.

The real thing can only be attained when men come to see themselves as emanation of universal Geist. For it is only then that they will not see the surrounding universe as a limit, an other. And since man depends on this surrounding universe, he can never feel integrity as long as it is seen as other. Because man starts off with a notion of himself as a finite being, and with a raw undeveloped form of life reflecting this, his longing for integrity is doomed to frustration until he can undergo the transformations which will raise him to a grasp of the universal.

The Hegelian notion of Geist is thus essential here. Spirit is necessarily embodied. Integrity thus cannot be achieved through an inner retreat, in which self-consciousness would cut itself off from the bodily. But once one admits that I am nothing apart from my body, we have also to count with the fact that my body is dependent on the surrounding world, that my life depends on a series of interchanges with this milieu. Now the integrity which Hegel posits as the goal is the negation of dependence on something other, it is the recognition of self in all that which is essential to me. It follows that there is no strategy of retreat which can give us integrity; there is no circumscribed definition of ourselves, either just as the human race, or just as individual human beings, and above all not as purely spiritual minds, within which we can feel in full possession of ourselves. Or rather, if we do this feeling is necessarily an illusory one. For in actual fact we as so defined are either ontologically or factually dependent on something other; we are at the mercy of foreign reality. All historical solutions which involve a retreat of this kind are branded by Hegel as illusions; this will be seen below with stoicism for instance.

Underlying this extremely far-reaching notion of integrity is the Hegelian preoccupation with fate. The opposition which is seemingly the most insurmountable of all is that between action and fate, between what men make of themselves which has a certain meaning for them, on one hand, and the seemingly senseless things which happen to them, of which death is the ultimate culmination, on the other. Hegel will not be satisfied until this dualism is overcome, and it is this aspiration which the drive for integrity reflects.

With this goal and the Hegelian notion of Geist in mind we can already see the kind of inadequacies from which earlier stages of self-certainty may suffer. There is first, the predicament where we depend on an external reality that does not reflect Geist. Secondly, there is the situation in which we are temporarily happy in this other dependence because we are unconscious of it; we have too raw and undeveloped a view of ourselves to see the gap. Such is the predicament of the master in the master-slave relation who has his world made over to reflect him by the labour of the slave, but who remains limited in his self-certainty. In another way, the happy stage of the Greek city-state is one in which men feel at home because they have not yet seen themselves as universal. Sooner or later these stages are bound to break apart because of the inner contradiction that man feels at home as a being which he is not.

The third predicament can arise in response to either of the first two; it is one based on retreat. Man achieves the illusion of self-identity by defining himself as an inner spiritual being, by fooling himself that he coincides with himself as a mind or spirit. Hegel refers to this often with the Fichtean formula 1 = 1; the error expressed here being precisely the belief in simple self-coincidence. For we have seen that a subject is necessarily a being who incorporates his other (his embodiment) and ‘returns to himself through this other, that is, comes to self-consciousness in his other. To achieve self-coincidence as spiritual beings is thus ontologically impossible; or otherwise put, its achievement could only be the abolition of the subject. Or, in other terms again, the subject is not only ‘self-consciousness’; he necessarily has the structure of ‘consciousness’ as well, with its inescapable bi-polarity between subject and independent object.

But nevertheless men are often tempted in the course of their long historical development to have recourse to this illusion, often because of the pain of the first predicament, i.e. dependence on an alien reality. But we can also come to this out of the second predicament, complaisance in an external expression which is inadequate to us as subjects. The first realization that a certain form of life in which we have been at home is not adequate to us takes the form of an alienation of certain men from this form; but since their external lives are still bound up in this social form, they may quite understandably define their newly-discovered universal nature in a purely spiritual, internal way. It would appear that both of these developments underlie stoicism, for instance.

Hegel opens the dialectic of self-consciousness with a discussion of its relation to life. We saw in part one why self-consciousness only arises in a living being. Hegel now seems to make this point but in an odd way. The ‘object’ (Gegenstand) of self-consciousness is a living thing, he says.

This notion of ‘object’, however, can be interpreted two ways. In the first section of the PhG, self-consciousness arose from an inner reality which ‘repelled itself from itself; and the result was an external manifestation or object which in turn must be seen as identical with the inner idea. Following this, one would think of the outer object which self-consciousness must overcome as its own embodiment. It is in connection with a reference back to this earlier notion of self-repulsion (p. 125) that Hegel speaks of the concept which ‘splits itself into the opposition of self-consciousness and life’ (PhG, 135).

But this notion of an object which must be overcome by self-consciousness can also apply to something else, to the object of desire. And here is where the famous Hegelian analysis of desire (Begierde) starts. For Hegel the drive for integrity is evident even in lower forms of life in the fact that they seek out what they need from the external world, and devour it, that is, incorporate it in themselves. In so doing they ‘cancel its otherness’. This process is essential (causally) to their continued existence. But Hegel assimilates this causal necessity to the ontological predicament of all subjects who to be must cancel the otherness of an external embodiment. And once we accept total integrity as the goal, then this assimilation is right, because I cannot be said to be really at home in my bodily existence if this in turn is dependent on foreign reality. Thus desire reflects not just the factual need for an object, but also the fundamental drive for integrity.

Self-consciousness has thus two objects, its embodiment and the object of desire. Its continued existence involves its overcoming or ‘returning to itself out of both. But these two forms of return are related in that the return out of the first involves overcoming the second. This is what Hegel seems to be saying in the following passage:

From now on, consciousness has as self-consciousness a double object; one immediate, the object of sensible certainty and perception, which however bears for consciousness the character of negativity; and the second, viz. itself, which is the true essence and which at first is only present in opposition to the first object. Self-consciousness presents itself here as the movement whereby this opposition is done away with and its equality with itself becomes real for it.

(PhG, 135)

That self-consciousness is only in living beings reflects the fact that life itself is a stage on the road to the kind of unity which is revealed in most perfect form in the subject. The passage which follows on life is resonant of Hegel’s earlier view of the Frankfurt period, according to which it was life rather than the subject which provided the paradigm of the identity of the different. Life only exists in an articulation (Gliederung) into existing individual forms (bestehende Gestalten). They seem to be independent, and yet they only exist in the process of life itself. They eventually pass away, and hence lose this independent existence, but this passing away is linked to the creation of new individuals. (This passage leans on the Hegelian idea that death and reproduction are intimately joined.)

Life is thus a process which can only maintain itself in the spawning of individual living beings, and yet which is always more than this external existence; it is never really coincident with these beings, and hence they must of necessity go under. But since life can still only be in living things, they must at the same time be replaced. So life’s fullest manifestation is in the continuous cycle of death and reproduction. As an inner reality which can only exist embodied, and yet must also cancel this embodiment in order to be, life is a préfiguration of spirit.

But only a prefiguration; life goes through this process unreflectingly, the negation of the outer embodiment is suffered dumbly by living creatures in their death. Human consciousness, on the other hand, can reach beyond the life of the individual and express in a conscious life form its link with the universal. In other words, the negation of the external embodiment, the return to the universal out of the particular, is effected in a new way by men. Not just in dying but in living consciously in the universal. And this engenders a kind of standing negation, one which does not abolish what is negated, as death does. In living in the universal, men can even be said to live beyond death (this is the meaning which Hegel gives to immortality, which he does not accept in the ordinary sense, as we saw in Part I).

The self-consciousness whose dialectic we shall now examine is a subject, destined for this conscious life in the universal, and also a living thing. This dual nature is essential to the dialectic. The seemingly unclear Hegelian point mentioned above, that the ‘object’ of self-consciousness is a living thing, must be interpreted to mean both objects. For self-consciousness is embodied in life; and as a living organism, its object of desire is a living being; it feeds on life.

Man cannot remain a simple ‘I’, simply self-identical, because he needs external things, external life, to live. He is a being of desire. But in consuming what he desires, he seems to overcome this foreign reality and recover integrity. Except that this integrity is not adequate to what he is (second standard predicament above). For the negation of otherness involved here is the simple negation which abolishes; even if it were complete, it would simply return man to the self-identity which is the death of subjectivity; the end of desire would be the end of man. But in fact it is never complete, new desires arise endlessly; so that human life at this level is an alternation between being before another which is wholly foreign, and having incorporated this, being before nothing at all.

Man, as a being who depends on external reality, can only come to integrity if he discovers a reality which could undergo a standing negation, whose otherness could be negated without its being abolished. But the negation of otherness without self-abolition, this is a prerogative of human, not animal consciousness. So that the basic desire of self-consciousness can only be fulfilled by another self-consciousness. ‘Self-consciousness attains its satisfaction only in another self-consciousness’ (PhG, 139).

Here we come to the basic idea, which will be explored in the next section in the dialectic of the master and the slave, that men seek and need the recognition of their fellows. The subject depends on external reality. If he is to be fully at home this external reality must reflect back to him what he is. In the dialectic of desire, we are faced with foreign objects which we then destroy and incorporate; what is needed is a reality which will remain, and yet will annul its own foreignness, in which the subject can nevertheless find himself. And this he finds in other men in so far as they recognize him as a human being (Anerkennen).

This is the real fulfilment of self-consciousness, because it is the real ‘unity of oneself in one’s other-being’ (Einheit seiner selbst in seinem Anderssein; p. 140). This is why the road towards man’s recognition that the universe is not other passes through the drama of mutual recognition, the first and basic model of the recognition of oneself in others. And the road to mutual recognition passes through, as we shall see in the following analysis of the master and the slave, the recognition of the universal. And this is why it is this mutual recognition which brings us to the reality of Geist. For Geist is this

absolute substance which in the perfect freedom and independence of its opposition, i.e., the opposition of different self-consciousnesses each existing für sich, is their unity: an ‘I’ that is a ‘we’ and a ‘we’ that is an T. In self-consciousness as the concept of Geist, consciousness comes to its turning point, at which it steps out of the multi-colored show of sensible immanence and the empty night of suprasensible transcendence into the spiritual daylight of presence.

(PhG, 140)

Hegel starts the dialectic of self-consciousness with the famous dialectic of the master and the slave. The contradiction underlying this is the following: men strive for recognition, for only in this way can they achieve integrity. But recognition must be mutual. The being whose recognition of me is going to count for me must be one that I recognize as human. The operation of reciprocal recognition is therefore one that we accomplish together. Each one, says Hegel, accomplishes for himself what the other tries to achieve in relation to him. My interlocutor sees in me another, but one which is not foreign, which is at one with himself; but this cancelling of my otherness is something that I must help to accomplish as well.

The contradiction arises when men at a raw and undeveloped stage of history try to wrest recognition from another without reciprocating. This is at a stage when men have not recognized themselves as universal, for to have done so is to see that recognition for me, for what I am, is recognition of man as such and therefore something that in principle should be extended to all. But here we have man as a particular individual (Einzelnes) who strives to impose himself, to achieve external confirmation.

This leads to armed struggle. And necessarily so, says Hegel. It is not just that men are opposed, since each seeks onesided recognition; it is also that the risk of one’s life is part of the very claim to recognition. We have seen earlier that self-consciousness is both a living being and somewhat more; somewhat more because it does not just undergo the life-process unconsciously, but is already beyond it in thought. In the attempt then to win recognition of themselves as self-consciousness men prove that they are beyond mere life by showing that they are not attached to this particular living thing which is themselves, that their recognition as ‘beings for themselves’ (Fürsichsein) is more important, that they will risk their lives for it.

This struggle easily leads to the death of one or both combattants. And this obviously misses the goal. Even if I remain alive in face of my dead adversary, I have won no recognition. My ‘negation’ of him has been a natural one, as Hegel says (p. 145), it is a simple negation as we saw earlier, whereas what is needed is a standing negation, one in which my opponent’s otherness is overcome, while he still remains in being. The problem is thus that while each is pushed to put his life in hazard, to show that he is above mere attachment to life, this remains essential. The only outcome to the struggle which can even look like a solution is one which takes this into account.

But this is the case with the classical outcome of enslavement. Before it comes to the death, one side gives in, recognizes its attachment to life, and becomes subjected to the other. The victor spares the vanquished in order to make him a slave. Both protagonists then preserve life, but in a very different way. The victor has won his point. That what is essential for him in his Fürsichsein, his own sense of self, and that life is subordinate. For the slave, however, it is life which is essential, his sense of self is now subordinate to an external existence which is beyond his control.

The full relation of master and slave has to be understood with the aid of a third term, material reality (Dingheit). Master is related to slave mediately through this reality: the master subjects the slave through this command over things, at the limit through the use of a chain. But at the same time, master is related to material reality through the slave. The relation of the master to what surrounds him is that of a pure consumer; the hard task of transforming things and preparing them for consumption is that of the slave. The master’s experience is of the lack of solid reality (Unselbständigkeit) of things; the slave is the one who experiences their independence and resistance as he works them.

But this outcome, although better than a fight to the death, is also vitiated as a solution. The recognition is onesided; slave is forced to recognize master, but not vice versa. But for this very reason the upshot is of no value for the master. His vis-à-vis is not seen to be a real other self, but has been reduced to subordination to things. Recognition by him is therefore worthless; the master cannot really see himself in the other. Rather he is reduced to the parlous condition of being surrounded by beings which to him cannot be self-conscious; so that the surrounding world on which he continues to depend cannot reflect back to him a human visage. His integrity is thus radically undermined just when it seemed assured.

But if this outcome is a failure ultimately for the master, for the slave it prepares the ground for ultimate success, and within the relationship a reversal slowly takes place. The slave at least has before him a being who exists for himself in the master, even if this master does not recognize him. His environment is not reduced to the sub-human, as is the case with the master.

But the important sources of the slave’s transformation are the fear of death and disciplined work. The short, three-page (148-50) passage in which Hegel deals with this is one of the most important in the PhG, for the themes are not only essential to Hegel’s philosophy but have had a longer career in an altered form in Marxism. The underlying idea, that servitude prepares the ultimate liberation of the slaves, and indeed general liberation, is recognizably preserved in Marxism. But the Marxist notion of the role of work is also foreshadowed here.

But the Hegelian theme which was not taken up in the successor philosophy is the role of the fear of death. The vitiated relation of master and slave arises from a struggle between men of limited horizons who are low on the scale of development. They have as yet no inkling of their link to the universal; for all their willingness to risk their external existence in order to impose their sense of self, this self of theirs is still that of a particular individual, a limited one. But in order to come to a real solution to this striving for recognition, men have to see themselves as universal, as we have seen.

For Hegel, a crucial factor in the education of men, in the transformation which brings them to the universal, is the fear of death. The prospect of death shakes them loose, as it were, from all the particularities of their life. Hegel uses the image here of a life which has hardened in a certain form. The menace of death then makes it that consciousness ‘has been inwardly dissolved, has trembled to its depths, and everything fixed in it has quaked’. (PhG, 148.)

The same idea recurs in a passage of the Philosophy of Right, where Hegel speaks of the necessity of war from time to time to bring men back to the universal. In ordinary life they are too sunk in their day-by-day particular preoccupations, they lose touch with the universal idea represented in the state. War and the risk of death shake them loose from these narrow preoccupations and bring them back to the universal. Needless to say, the passage has done nothing to enhance Hegel’s reputation among contemporary Liberals.

But the role of the fear of death should not be surprising in the light of what we have seen of Hegel’s philosophy. The return to the universal Geist involves an overcoming of the particular external existence in which it is embodied. This is why as we have seen death comes necessarily to living things. Of course, the highest negation of his external existence is achieved by man in thought, that is, while still alive. But he is helped to this inner negation by coming face to face with death, the final outer negation, for this shows the true status of all the external particularity in his life, it shows it as necessarily passing, as destined to be negated, and thus invites the negation in thought which is the return to the universal. It is not just that the prospect of hanging, as Dr Johnson said, concentrates the mind wonderfully. It is also that it focusses it on the universal.

Now the beginning of the reversal lies here. It is the slave that really suffers the fear of death, for he has been, and still is, at the mercy of another. So it is he that is shaken loose from his particular sense of self, while the master victorious is just hardened in his. But this fear would not be enough, it would have no more than passing effect, if the slave did not transform himself by the work he is forced to do in his service to the master.

And this brings us to the theme which is later one of the central ideas of Marxism. The master we saw above has the advantage that his relation to things is that of simple enjoyment (Genuß); it is the slave who experiences their resistance and independence. But with time, the advantages reverse. The master being in face of a world which offers him no effective resistance tends to sink back into a stupor of self-coincidence. He approaches the stagnant pole where I = I. He is simply a consumer.

The slave however has to struggle with things to transform them, and sooner or later he achieves a mastery over them. And in so doing he imprints his own ideas on them. The man-made environment thus comes to reflect him, it is made up of his creations.

Work thus plays a crucial role in man’s struggle for integrity. We saw earlier that the core problem is that the subject is always ‘outside himself, he always depends on a surrounding universe; he must therefore come to recognize himself in this surrounding. This is why the principal path to integrity lies through recognition by another; in the human environment a man can recognize himself in others. But now we see another important path; man can come to see himself in the natural environment by making it over in conformity with his own project. For in doing this we achieve another standing negation, a reflection of ourselves which endures.

Achieving integrity involves travelling both of these paths. Ultimately it is mutual recognition which is the most essential. But in order to achieve it we must transform ourselves from limited individuals to self-conscious embodiments of the universal. And this brings us to a second important function of work: in transforming things we change ourselves. By creating a standing reflection of ourselves as universal beings we become such beings.

This idea is deeply rooted in Hegel’s whole outlook and in his notion of the subject which as we saw is fundamental to his philosophy. A subject is necessarily embodied; hence any change in the subject, such as the rise from limited individuality to universal consciousness, must be mediated by a change in his embodiment. This is why as we have seen in real historical terms the growth of human thought goes along with a development of his forms of life, of what we call civilizations. But these forms of life involve different man-made environments. As Hegel sees in the description of the master-slave relation, each is related to the other through their relation to things. Hence higher forms of human coexistence, which bring us closer to integrity, each are linked with a characteristic way of relating to things, i.e., a certain form of man-made environment. Thus both paths are complementary, and both are involved in the growth of higher forms of life which embody the higher spiritual status of man.

Thus Hegel’s notion here is that the slave becomes a universal consciousness through his work. Both the fear of death and the discipline of service were necessary. The fear of death alone would have shaken him loose for a moment from the particular, but would have built no standing embodiment of universal consciousness. But work alone, uninformed by the fear of death, would have produced just particular abilities (Geschicklichkeit), not a universal consciousness of self.

For what the slave achieves through his work, as is evident in the next section, is the grasp of himself as free thought. He recognizes in the power to transform things the power of thought, the power to remake things according to concepts, and thus universal models. It would have been possible to develop particular abilities and skills without awakening this consciousness. But the slave being already brought to the universal by the fear of death sees in his transforming ability the power of a consciousness which thinks and executes, which can create models, archetypes, and then change things to conform to them. He thus sees in the world of objects made by him the reflection of himself as universal, as a thinking being. This passage shows how much Hegel’s philosophy of history anticipates historical materialism. The intellectual grasp of things in concepts (a word etymologically related to ‘grasp’ in both English and German) is seen as arising here out of the physical shaping of things in work. Conceptual thinking arises out of the learned ability to transform things. We learn to know the world of material reality, and ultimately our own minds, in trying to bend this matter to our design. Conceptual thought grows out of this interchange.

The master-slave relation has thus brought about a reversal. The master’s prerogative of being only a consumer leads him to stagnant self-coincidence. While the slave who is subject to the refractory existence of matter gradually turns the tables, turns this resistance to account by making it the standing reflection of himself as universal consciousness. The reversal is the more complete in that he owes his transformation to his subjection; only under the discipline of service would he have undertaken the work which has raised him above his original limits.

2
The dialectic of the master and the slave issues in a higher stage, which Hegel identifies with the philosophy of stoicism. Through work, discipline and the fear of death, the slaves have come to a recognition of the universal, of the power of conceptual thought. And this is already to have won through to a certain freedom. For first, man as a spiritual being comes to greater self-realization in becoming capable of universal reflection. And secondly, since thought is the basis of everything, man comes closer to overcoming the alien nature of things when he thinks in universal categories. Conceptual thought, as against representation in images (Vorstellung), is a medium we move freely in because we truly master it (‘a concept is for me immediately my concept’, PhG, 152). At the same time, it is truly at the root of things. Thus ‘I’n thought I am free, because I am not in another, but remain quite within my own purview [schlechthin bei mir selbst], and the object which is essence for me is in undivided unity my being-for-self [mein Fürmichsein]’ (PhG, 152).

But stoic freedom is radically incomplete. For we are still dealing with a philosophy of slaves. Through their commerce with matter they have come to the intuition that thought is the basis of all. But just as they cannot make over their environment, and particularly their society, in order to express this intuition – for a rational political structure and laws will only come at a later stage in history – so they are still incapable of working through their idea in order to show the particular determinations of their world as manifestation of universal, (in the Hegelian sense) conceptual necessity.

These two inabilities, practical and theoretical, go together in Hegel’s philosophy of history. Men can only come to see the world as Geist or rational necessity manifested in reality, when they are able to shape their own human reality according to this necessity, i.e., to practical reason. The practical experience of achieving the reflection of self in other is essential to the theoretical insight. Once again we see how the thesis that Geist is necessarily embodied leads to a partial convergence with historical materialism.

Hegel thus identifies stoicism as a stage of political impotence which is reflected in abstractness of thought. His critique of it is as a strategy of retreat, to use our earlier expression. It is founded on the intuition that consciousness is a thinking essense. But it is still incapable of deriving the determinate shape of the world from this principle. It cannot discern the rationality of things. Its notion of thought is still abstract; it has not yet (and obviously could not have) the notion that thought necessarily ‘goes over into’ its embodiment from which we can derive (as Hegel will do in the Philosophies of Nature and Spirit) much of the structure of the world.

This leads us into a kind of formalism. Thought underlies reality, but one cannot say in detail how, and so the particular content of the world is necessarily seen as contingent, as just given. Stoicism can only hold onto universal categories, like the true and the good, wisdom and virtue, but cannot derive a determinate content for them.

Now although applied to stoicism, the analysis here is reminiscent of other kinds of formalism criticized by Hegel, and in particular, we are reminded of Hegel’s critique of Kant, of the Kantian dualism whereby the forms of experience are derived from the understanding, but the matter is given, and from a source which is forever unknowable. Hegel is clearly also combatting this dualism in his critique of stoicism.

In any case, the reply of stoicism to its inability to derive the content of reality from thought is a strategy of retreat; it is to consider this content as inessential. Thought is free, the subject as thinking is free. But freedom for Hegel means being oneself, ‘bei sich’ (at home) in one’s other, or object. The subject of stoicism cannot be “bei sich ”in relation to the determinate reality of the world, for this is something foreign, something that cannot be derived from thought. The strategy is to withdraw from this reality and to redefine the object as simply the object of thought.

The stoic is thus free as a thinking subject in abstraction from the external circumstances of his life, ‘whether on the throne or in chains’. ‘The freedom of self-consciousness is indifferent over against natural existence’ (p. 158, italics in original).

But this obviously will not wash. The retreat towards inner self-identity cannot bring freedom for an embodied subject whose real freedom must thus be externally expressed in a way of life. Stoicism is thus in contradiction with itself, it is a putative realization of freedom which is in fact its negation. As such it must go under. The core intuition, that conceptual thought is at the root of things, this is a permanent gain, but the claim to inner freedom collapses.

In accounting for this collapse and the derivation of the next stage, Hegel brings us through another historical philosophy, ancient scepticism. This he paints as the fulfilment of the basic idea of stoicism; where this latter considers the determinate content of things as irrelevant or inessential, scepticism goes over to the attack and calls it into question. It is the polemical consequence of stoicism.

But this just serves to point up more acutely the underlying contradiction. For as embodied subjects we go on living in external reality. We may well declare its non-being, it returns unceasingly and inescapably. So that in fact what we have is an oscillation between a sense of our own self-identity, and an equally acute sense of our dependence on a changing, shifting external reality. As fast as we call this changing reality into question in order to experience ourselves as immutable and self-identical, our own inner emptiness forces us to accept that we are embodied in the mutable and self-external.

But this oscillation occurs in a single consciousness, and putting these two moments together we derive a new dialectical phase, in which the subject has to accept the fact of inner division (Entzweiung), in which the inner self itself is painfully divided, into an ideal immutable and self-identical being on one side and one plunged in a world of confusion and change on the other. This is the stage of the unhappy consciousness, in which the relation of master and slave, which stoicism claimed to have escaped, reappears, but now within the subject, in the relation between these two mutually incompatible sides.

The pages on the unhappy consciousness introduce us to some of the fundamental ideas of Hegel’s philosophy of religion. We recognize the themes of Hegel’s writings on religion of the 1790s, in particular the theme of separation, where man projects his lost unity into a transcendent spirit to whom he subjects himself absolutely, as in the religion of Abraham.

In the PhG Hegel presents the unhappy consciousness as one who is deeply divided because it is both the immutable self-identical subject of thought and the individual who is subject to the changeable world. But this situation as it is lived by the subject is one in which he identifies himself as particular with the inessential and mutable. The immutable is projected into a beyond. His unity with it is felt only in the sense of loss, the sense that he must somehow go beyond his present estate and achieve oneness with this immutable. But since at the present stage, particular and immutable are so defined as to be incompatible, this attempt is perpetually doomed to failure. Since I cannot stop being a particular individual, I can never attain to unity with the unchanging.

As a relationship with a transcendent reality, to which I cannot be indifferent, but with which I must strive to unite myself, the unhappy consciousness can be seen as a religious one.1 And underlying Hegel’s study here is the wealth of his reflections on the historical development of Judaism and Christianity, as well as on the relations of religion and philosophy. We shall look at some of these in our examination of chapter VII of the PhG, and return again to a discussion of this matter in chapter XVIII below.

But in the passage under study here, Hegel’s dialectical development only refers (implicitly) to certain stages of medieval Christianity. We cannot go into its detail here. It includes an interpretation of the Crusades as a vain attempt to recover contact with the historical Jesus, who must as a particular disappear and ever recede from us in time. The failure of this venture forces men to face the real destiny of Christianity which is to make the unity of God and man real in a community (Gemeinde).

Hegel then continues with what is obviously a treatment of the medieval church, though some of the things he says obviously apply to any church which has not yet realized the full unity of man and God. A church life led under the consciousness of division is one where men still see the universal outside them, as something they must be subject to. The hierarchical nature of the medieval church reflects this sense of subordination. But just as with the slave earlier, this servitude under an external discipline forms man and makes him over so that he can recognize the universal in himself. We repeat here in a more internalized way the passage from external subjugation to an identification with reason.

This transition takes us beyond unhappy consciousness to a higher stage, and with this transition the ‘self-consciousness’ section of the PhG comes to an end. The higher phase, which Hegel seems to identify in part with the Renaissance, is one in which men have come to see that Reason underlies all reality. In other words, they have come to the insight which was missing in stoic consciousness, the sense that thought is not only a higher reality than external things, but that rational thought determines the course of things. Hence they are confident that they will, as rational beings, recognize themselves in reality, that whatever they think or do will be in tune with the rational basis of the universe. A new and higher notion of integrity is born, and will now have to be worked out.

We come here to the end of the chapter on self-consciousness. Just as the first section took us beyond the opposition between the knowing subject and his world; so this section takes the subject of action and desire who at first seems to stand over against a world on which he depends and shows how this opposition is overcome. In the first section this required that we develop and refine our notion of the object of knowledge, starting with the most primitive view, that of sensible certainty. Here we had to take the agent from his most primitive stage as a particular individual opposed to others to a realization of his universal nature, which is the same as the universal thought underlying the world. The mutual foreignness of agent and world is thus overcome. But like the first, this section has just established the principle of unity. It remains to trace its development in the sections which follow.

3
I shall just give the briefest indications of the development of this third section on Reason. Its starting point is as we saw where men reach the intuition that rationality, i.e., the principle of their own thought, determines all reality, and hence they are certain to be ‘at home’ in the world. Or as Hegel puts it in a lapidary phrase, ‘Reason is the certainty of consciousness that it is all reality’ (Die Vernunft ist die Gewißheit des Bewußtseins, alle Realität zu sein, PhG, 176).

The chapter ends in a transition in which the individual consciousness is shown to be an inadequate vehicle for spirit, and this grounds a basic shift in the PhG, which will follow henceforth supra-individual embodiments of subjectivity, first political society (chapter VI), then religion (chapter VII). Thus an examination of consciousness which starts with the individual shows the inadequacy of all such conceptions and forces us to shift to a wider spirit.

I

The chapter falls into three sections. The first of these is analogous to the opening part on ‘consciousness’ in that it deals with different theories of science. And its basic motif is the attempt to make good the promise of reason, that we can achieve a vision of things as fully rationally determined. The search for a rationally necessary science takes ‘observing reason’ through different modes of scientific thought, from the simple observation of regularities to the search for natural laws. It leads reason to turn its attention from inanimate and focus on animate nature where its instinct tells it – rightly, thinks Hegel – that it will come closer to seeing self-maintaining form. But even here it fails to find thoroughgoing rational necessity.

Hegel makes clear that this is not because of any inadequacy in the sciences of animate or inanimate nature. Contingency is a necessary feature of them, as he makes very clear (esp. 193–5). These sciences are thus perfectly valid forms of knowledge on their level, tracing regularities and laws without trying ultimately to justify them by reason. The hunger of observing reason here will in fact only be filled by speculative philosophy which shows why the world must have the structure it has, including the degree of contingency it contains.

Finally observing reason is led to examine man, as the most likely locus where rational necessity can be seen as work. But this fails because of the nature of observing reason itself, which tries to understand man by looking on him as an object, and cannot grasp his nature as a being who also makes himself. Observing reason cannot really cope with the meshing of the given and the self-made in man, the ‘Einheit des vorhandenen und des gemachten Seins’ (227), but tries to separate these two aspects from each other. It treats man like a thing, and that is why Hegel sees something appropriate in bringing this section’s discussion to a head in an examination of phrenology, which had been in vogue for a time at the end of the eighteenth century. In phrenology man’s typically human qualities are related to inert matter, the bumps and hollows of his skull.2

Hegel sees, of course, a speculative point in this. It is true that spirit does equal matter, for it must be embodied. But this relation must be expressed in the ‘infinite judgement’ (253) which affirms both the identity of Geist and its embodiment, and their difference; above all which portrays this embodiment as posited by Geist. Observing reason lacks an understanding of man as agent, and hence we go over to a phase of reason which parallels ‘self-consciousness’, where we follow the rational agent.

II

The insight of the universal sovereignty of reason has also transformed man’s self-certainty. Just as observing reason was confident of finding rational necessity in nature, so rational self-consciousness is confident of achieving satisfaction in the world.

The dialectic of self-consciousness opens here with the figure of the individual searcher after pleasure. But this is not square one. This individual, unlike the subject of desire in the earlier chapter has behind him the development which brought us to reason, and hence he has reason’s certainty that he will find himself in the reality which surrounds him. Man and the world are designed for happiness, man has only to reach out, as it were, and pluck the fruit of happiness. Instead of consuming external reality as in the earlier dialectic of desire, the subject, certain of his unity an sich with it, just removes from it ‘the form of other-being’ (p. 263): The object of pleasure remains an independent being. If the paradigm of the dialectic of desire seems to be consumption, that of this dialectic seems to be sexual pleasure.

The section is full of (as always unstated) references to Goethe’s Faust, including an incorrect quote. But Hegel obviously has in mind as well the Enlightenment doctrine of the natural goodness of man. And this is obviously an advanced idea in the sense that it can only come after a long development of human culture. The Enlightenment doctrine of man as naturally good and hence as finding the criterion of right in his own natural desires (whose fulfilment is pleasure) builds on the view of nature as a rational harmonious whole which underlay the scientific enterprise (observing reason). In this regard, Hegel’s derivation here makes sense.

But although on an incomparably higher level, this naive figure of self-consciousness will obviously not solve the problem. For man still seeks satisfaction as an individual, even though now he may define himself in universal categories, and see thus that all men are as he is. And as a pure individual he must see the reality which surrounds him, both social and natural, as foreign to him. His self-realization is not a common one with that of other men, but is particular.

But all particulars must go under. Indeed, there is as we have seen an inner connection between the full self-affirmation of a particular thing and its necessary demise. For the external particular, though an essential expression of Geist or the universal, nevertheless contradicts it and as such must disappear; and the moment of its fullest flowering is when the contradiction is at its most acute.

Hegel thus sees an inner connection between the individual’s fulfilment as a particular in pleasure and his death. Man who defines his fulfilment as that of pleasure experienced by him as a particular faces his inevitable demise as total annihilation. It is not that pleasure brings on death, or that by avoiding the first one can avoid the second. Hegel’s point is not that pleasure is to be avoided, and death is, after all, inevitable. The point is rather that defined in such a way that his fulfilment is solely pleasure man experiences this death as an abrupt and total ending.

By contrast a man who so defines himself that his fulfilment lies in a larger, universal goal does not see death as anihilation, for he is identified with something which survives him. But the contrast also goes deeper. For the figure we are studying here death is not just total, but also a blind, external necessity, a fate.

The fate of death is necessarily linked to life for the reason mentioned above. But it is blind only because, defined as a pure particular, man cannot see this inner necessity. Being purely inner, it is purely ‘external’, that is it seems to him blind and reasonless. Whereas the man who sees himself as the vehicle of the universal not only does not see death as total, but also understands why it must be in virtue of the very universal Geist with which he identifies himself. He is thus doubly reconciled to it.

The underlying goal, the reconciliation of man and fate, is described here briefly as a condition in which ‘consciousness…would recognize…its own goal and doing in fate, and its fate in its own goal and doing, would recognize its own essence in this necessity’ (PhG, 265). For the man who defines his fulfilment as pleasure of the particular, there is however only ‘a pure leap into the opposed term’ (ein reiner Sprung in das Entgegengesetzte, loc. cit.).

This figure is therefore in contradiction. Reaching out for the fulfilment of pleasure he meets the most absolute non-fulfilment. The certainty of finding oneself in reality falls into annihilation. Self-consciousness is thus forced on; and the next step is obviously to incorporate this external necessity in itself. Since this necessity is that linking the particular to the universal, this means incorporating the universal in its own notion of fulfilment, so that instead of desiring simply one’s own pleasure, one’s spontaneous desire is now seen as aimed at the general good. We have thus a picture of man as spontaneously desiring the good, as having the law of morality in his heart.

Whatever we think of the rigour of this transition, we obviously have here another very important stream of Enlightenment thought (which like all such has been re-edited in different forms since). For alongside and later largely supplanting the utilitarian idea of man as naturally good in his naive egoism, since this fitted into a natural or attainable harmony of interests, came the idea of man as naturally good in being spontaneously altruistic. Certainly this is what many people got out of the writings of Rousseau, and doctrines of this kind had a wide currency at the end of the eighteenth century, although the impact of the French Revolution somewhat dented them. It is obviously this broad movement which Hegel has in mind, although there are a number of (still implicit) references to Schiller’s Robbers.

In this figure man thus believes in the goodness of his spontaneous feelings. He stands over against a world which is full of suffering and wrong. This must be attributed to the false and unjustified restraints placed on men by society or civilization since man is naturally good. The solution is to free men from these restraints, bring them back to what they really are, and thus make real in the world order the law of the heart.

But this is not going to work either. Man must be lifted to universality so that his aspirations correspond to the universal good; but this requires a long formation and discipline, it requires a hard-won transformation. It is foolish to think that our unreconstructed spontaneous feeling will be one with the universal. The unity here as Hegel puts it is not yet mediated.

The resultant contradiction comes out in two ways. First the world which would result from the imposition on the course of affairs of the law I feel in my heart is not genuinely universal. It is full of ideas and aspirations which are simply mine and which I uncritically project on the universal. It follows that others cannot recognize the law of their hearts in this world. The attempt to reconstruct the world in this way thus leads not to unity and reconciliation, but fanatical struggle between men.

But second, even where the course of things reflects the universal, where, for instance, the structure of society and its laws reflect rational norms, this consciousness cannot recognize it. For the genuine universal is such that man can only reach it by discipline, as we saw. Thus rational laws will always appear as external restraints to those convinced of their own spontaneous goodness. The law of the heart can thus in principle never succeed in reforming the world. For once it does attain some amelioration in things, its work appears to it as foreign, as the enemy, as just another form of the external constraints that it is attacking.

This belief, says Hegel, leads in fact to a fantastic presumption, in which each believes that the world should be reformed according to his instincts. The resultant struggle, suffering and frustration is the exact opposite of the reconciliation which was supposed to be attained. This form of consciousness is thus in acute contradiction with itself. Its struggle to maintain itself in this contradiction Hegel describes as a kind of madness. It desperately tries to blame the evil in the world on priests and despots, and hence to reconcile universal wrong with the supposedly good heart. But the feebleness of this explanation just shows up the underlying contradiction. In fact it has to recognize in the world order ‘the law of all hearts’, the net result of the struggles of all to realize their aspirations.

But this prepares the ground for a new dialectical reversal. If the world order is the law of all hearts, then it can be considered as potentially capable of expressing the universal. What it would require on this view would be simply to be purged of individual self-seeking. The tables are thus turned. Instead of hoping to save the world by imposing our own individuality on it, our idea now is to purify it by removing all traces of individual aspiration from our actions.

This stance of consciousness Hegel calls the attempts to realize ‘virtue’. But he makes it clear that this is not the virtue of the ancients, which was on the contrary to live according to the mores of one’s people. This is an individualistic virtue, founded on self-denial; and it will now be evident that Hegel will find it unacceptable.

In fact it is another one of those strategies of retreat of which I spoke earlier, at the beginning of the discussion on self-consciousness. It is reminiscent of stoicism. While the earlier form defined the self as inner freedom by abandoning our outer bodily reality, this present form tries to neutralize it morally. The particular expression of the individual must be suppressed, he must become nothing but the expression of the universal.

The peculiar feature of this kind of phase is man’s sense of his own unworthiness, his apologizing for his existence, and his attempt to suppress his particularity, and become nothing but universal will. This is given some importance in the PhG, because it comes up three times, first in unhappy consciousness, the second time here, and thirdly at the end of Chapter VI in the section on evil and its forgiveness. This latter is an important stage of the dialectic because it is invoked again in the transition to absolute knowledge.

But the attempt to suppress one’s particularity is doomed to failure; and this for the simple reason that the universal cannot be made real unless in the actions of particular men, and men in so acting cannot abstract from what they are as men with particular needs and desires. In other words, man cannot suppress his particularity, and act just as a vehicle of the universal; for he cannot simply act on the motive of conforming his action to universal maxims, setting aside all other motives. To refuse all other forms of action is to do nothing. And this is why we can see this insistence on the suppression of particularity as a form of retreat, a refusal of the very conditions of external, particular existence.

As against the philosophy of self-abnegating virtue, Hegel’s is a philosophy of self-realization; becoming the vehicle of the universal is also for man a fulfilment – or at least it will be when he is fully formed. But obviously on the road to this full formation, his ‘lower’ nature will be in conflict with this universal vocation. Dualistic philosophies reflect this. But more, they justify the discipline and training necessary to achieve the higher integration. We saw this with the piety of unhappy consciousness, for instance.

On the contemporary scene, however, a philosophy of self-denying virtue is no longer justified, and Hegel is harsh and ironic in his dealings with it. His point is that the universal cannot find real expression (Wirklichkeit) except through the lives and actions of particular individuals. But this is made in an elaborate image in which the consciousness of virtue is portrayed as a knight, a sort of Don Quixote, who cannot effectively combat the world of egoistic actors, precisely because this world provides the only conditions of realization of the universal in the name of which he fights. His main concern, Hegel says scoffingly, is to keep his sword immaculate. In short the knight of virtue is condemned by his too pure notion of virtue to inactivity. He cannot intervene effectively in history to realize the good, because this is inseparable from the affirmation of his particularity.

The upshot of this contradiction will be a new phase, the third major phase of this chapter on reason. In the previous figure we learned to see the course of things as the outcome of the self-realizing actions of individuals; here we have learned that the universal can only come to be through such self-realizing actions. So now we step to a higher level in which we see individual self-realization as the expression of the universal. The next stage of the dialectic will thus be a figure of self-consciousness which knows itself as realizing the universal in its actions.

III

In the last section of Reason we come then to forms of consciousness in which the individual sees himself as united with the universal. We have gone beyond the opposition between the individual’s goals and the reality over against them. The individual is now united in his action with external reality which therefore reflects reason.

This unity really comes about in objective spirit, that is Geist reflected in the life of a people, which Hegel calls ethical substance. But in this last section we tarry awhile among other forms of individual consciousness which give Hegel the opportunity to consider other contemporary ideas and moral beliefs. But this tarrying also makes clear the importance of the transition. In a sense the PhG can be thought of as having two parts, whose frontier lies here. In the first, we are dealing with forms of individual consciousness, even if we deal with men in interaction, as in the dialectic of the master and the slave.

But in the chapters which follow, on Spirit and Religion, we are taking spirit as a supra-personal subject, first as the spirit of a people, and then as the self-consciousness of the world-spirit in Religion. This shift in the dialectic is of course necessary if we are to come to absolute knowledge in which Geist is united with its world, for only the world-subject can be seen as so united, the individual qua individual can never be.

Thus at a certain point we have to shift our centre of gravity; we have to see the individual no longer as the centre with his social relation as a peripheral fact about him, but rather see the social whole as central, and the individual as a manifestation of it. It is this latter balance which Hegel wants to convey in the frequent use of the term ‘substance’. The spirit of the whole society is the underlying reality, from which the acts of individuals emanate. But this is not to say that they are its helpless subordinates, rather they recognize themselves in it (p. 310). Moreover, this spirit is not something separate from them, it cannot exist without them. The ‘ethical substance’ (sittliche Substanz) can be thought of as ‘the essence of self-consciousness; but this in turn is the reality (Wirklichkeit) and determinate existence (Dasein) of the substance, its self and will’. (PhG, 312).

Thus the Geist of a people can only come to reality in the individual subjectivities. And it follows that it is still not at its fullest development, it is still unconscious and partially deformed when it is not reflected in individuals. But this, of course, is the reality in the whole period between the demise of the Greek city-state and the full flowering of the modern law-state. This latter requires therefore a double development: both the individual and the public expression of Geist in laws and institutions must change and grow so that the former can come to recognize himself in the latter.

Hegel seems to have thought that this last transition was happening in his day. The figures he studies here, being all recognizable as contemporary ideas, thus reflect the transition. But, of course, his interest here in the PAG is not to derive the final form of the state, but just to show that we cannot understand consciousness without this shift from the individual to the ‘substance’, whose development we will take up in the next chapter starting from the Greeks.

The figures of this section all reflect a consciousness which is certain of the universal significance of its action. As elsewhere in this chapter, and in the work as a whole, the discussion here reflects Hegel’s settling of accounts with the currents of his day. There is not space to follow the argument, but we should look briefly at his treatment of Kant, who is taken to task (unnamed) in the discussion of the last figure of this section, ‘law-testing reason’.

In this figure, reason is called on to test laws which could claim to be morally binding by applying a criterion of self-consistency: is there a contradiction in following a given maxim, or not?

The reference to Kant is obvious, and Hegel’s reaction not hard to guess. He makes the widely familiar objection that any maxim can be shown to be consistent, but adds this twist, that in a way we can show some, e.g. community of goods, to be contradictory, but in quite the same way the same can be shown of the regime of private property. This contradiction poses no problem for Hegel. He quite agrees with Kant and the whole bourgeois epoch that private property is the right regime; but this cannot be shown from the supposedly greater consistency of acting on this principle.

But in finally going over to Geist, we draw from this last figure the following idea, that the free individual who stands over against the society cannot find any real content for his moral reason; he cannot reason consequently to definite conclusions in morals. True, the basis of morality is that one act according to universal maxims, according in other words to the Geist which is our real nature, and which is universal (and thus we put together Kant and Aristotle). But if we understand this abstractly, then we have an empty criterion. In the abstract, where reason is just seen as residing in form, in a certain way of thinking, then anything can be justified, any maxim can be universalized. It is only when we see reason as having certain ontological requirements, as calling for an external reality, and a human social reality of a certain kind – in particular one that will express in political institutions the requirement of universal laws – that we can provide a content for practical reason. The shape of our moral duty arises from the nature of the social reality which must come to be for Geist to be fulfilled; and Geist’s being fulfilled is for us a moral duty, for our nature is precisely this, Geist, or to use an older phrase, rational life.

In the end, therefore, the truly moral man is one who does not hope to give himself his own laws purely from his own inner consciousness, but on the contrary he feels the pull of duty from his society. To try to reason purely on one’s own is to reason without criteria, hence arbitrarily. ‘This immediate law-giving is thus a tyrannical wantonness which makes its arbitrary will into law…’ (PhG, 309). Hence Hegel seems to reverse totally the verdict of Kant who made of autonomy the very touchstone of all morality.

But really the truth is more complicated. There is a first unreflecting sense of duty which has to be broken into by the universal individual reasoning for himself; and in the subsequent fight between external authority and autonomy, Hegel is not unreservedly on the side of either. Autonomy is right because it is a necessary stage in the formation of man. In the ultimate, however, the two come together in that fully rational man will see his own fulfilment reflected in the law-state to whose institutions he gives his allegiance. But he will then come to see the Kantian vision as one-sided; he will see it as one of the fore-runners of his own; but only as one of the developments that prepared his present achievement. The other necessary condition of this achievement lies in the slow development of the institutions themselves to which the vast run of men never ceased to give their absolute allegiance, in spite of Enlightenment philosophers, be these institutions religious or political.

The break with Kant is thus profound even where Hegel is claiming to ‘complete’ him. And along with the difference between pure autonomy and a social morality goes another: since the fullest ethic is one lived in a society, is nothing but one’s duty to a society, the highest ethic is also one which is fulfilled. It is not just an ‘ought’, some thing that should be: the norms we follow are those which are being lived out in the institutions which exist in our society, and which we maintain by our allegiance. An ethic which presents us a model which just ought to be always earns Hegel’s contempt. This is the basic point of his rejection of both Kant and Fichte’s moral philosophy: they present us ethics of pure Sollen.

Rather, says Hegel, spirit living in a people shows us laws which are at the same time Sein, real existence. We have no room here either for faith; self-consciousness lives within the spiritual reality of Geist, which men lost with the demise of Greek city-state, and which they pine to regain. We are now about to recover it in a form consonant with universal reason, but first we return to see it in its original unconscious beauty.

 

 

1 We can see here the origin of the Feuerbachian and Marxian conception of religious consciousness as alienated. Not that Feuerbach and Marx had the same notion of religion as Hegel, of course. These successors ‘anthropologized’ Hegel’s Spirit. What replaced Hegel’s Geist was man, generic man. For Hegel, on the other hand, man must come to see himself as a vehicle of a spirit which was that of a broader reality, whose total embodiment was the universe. So that even at the summit of his development man remains in the presence of something greater than himself.

2 For the relation of Hegel’s discussion here to issues of contemporary explanation, cf. Alasdair Maclntyre, ‘Hegel on Faces and Skulls’, in Maclntyre (Ed.) Hegel, New York, 1972, 219–36.

 
    