## CHAPTER X
## Being
 

 

### I: DASEIN
The first movement of Hegel’s logic, if one can use this musical expression, runs through the first two chapters of the first part of Being, Quality. After this, in the third chapter, Hegel takes another tangent in order to link this first study with Quantity; but the first two chapters form an unquestioned unity of development.

The guiding thread of this movement is the notion of determinate being. In it Hegel manages to express his basic ontological vision of finite being as the necessary and yet inadequate and hence vanishing vehicle of infinite being. He establishes this vision in an argument about Being.

The germ of the whole thing is contained in the first famous argument in the opening lines. Let us start with the simple notion of being and we shall see that it is inadequate. Nothing is simply without having some determinate quality. Simple being which was nothing but this, i.e., was neither animal, vegetable, nor mineral, etc., would be nothing. And this is the famous first argument of the logic: pure being turns out to be pure emptiness, nothing; and reciprocally, this nothing which is purely indeterminate is equivalent to pure being. Hence the notion of pure being frustrates its own purpose. We cannot characterize reality with it alone, and we are forced to move to a notion of being as determinate, as having some quality and not another. Being can only be thought as determinate.

But this means that being and non-being are joined together; for the only way to characterize determinate being is in terms of some property, and property terms can only be made intelligible by being opposed, contrasted to each other. In this sense Hegel takes up the Spinozan principle that all determination is negation. The upshot of this first dialectic of being and non-being is thus the synthesis of the two in Dasein or Determinate Being.

In Hegel’s exposition, however, we do not arrive immediately at Dasein; the first synthesis of Being and Nothing is Becoming, which also can be said to unite the two: what is coming to be or passing away is moving from not-being to being or vice-versa. It is clear why Hegel wants to bring in becoming here: for it is central to his ontology: Geist can only be embodied, and yet the embodiments are all inadequate, and hence disappear to give place to others; the being of Geist is thus a perpetual movement, a perpetual coming to be and passing away.

But the derivation of Becoming here is not as solid as that of Dasein. This is the first, but not the last place in the Logic where Hegel will go beyond what is strictly established by his argument, because he sees in the relation of concepts a suggestion of his ontology: here the universality of movement and becoming in the relation of Being and Non-Being. But of course as probative arguments these passages are unconvincing. They fail, as strict conceptual proof, however persuasive they are as interpretations for those who hold Hegel’s view of things on other grounds. Thus, in this case, the notion of becoming imposes itself supposedly because of the passage from Being to Nothing and back; but this is a passage which our thought is forced to when we contemplate either. Of course, as we know, this distinction between thought and reality is ultimately untenable; but we cannot trade on this principle at this stage.1 We are dealing with Kantian-type categories, categories in which we think about things; what we have to show is not that in our thought about things we move from one category to another, but rather that things cannot be thought in certain categories unless others also apply. And this is what we do show when we establish that Sein (Being) can only be applied as Dasein (Determinate Being), whereas we have not yet shown the objective necessity of Becoming. This will come when we examine Dasein further and see that it is a prey to contradiction and hence movement.

Dasein
This is the basic thesis which the second chapter attempts to establish and here is the crux of the argument. Contradiction is attributed to Dasein or Determinate Being via the notion of negation. We saw above that Dasein is a marriage of being and nothing, Hegel will say here: of reality and negation. Let us look at this more closely. In the complex argument which follows, Hegel weaves a number of separate strands together without clearly distinguishing them.

We can think of determinate being as a marriage of reality and negation first because of the Spinozan principle mentioned above that all determination requires negation. It is essential to the meaning of our descriptive concepts that they be contrasted with others. We cannot have the shape concept ‘square’ without other shape concepts, like ‘round’, which can be contrasted with it; we cannot have ‘red’ without ‘yellow’, ‘green’ or ‘blue’ or some such. To enrich our colour vocabulary is to add to our available stock of colour distinctions. Thus because all the property-terms by which we can characterize determinate being are essentially contrasted with others, and because we can only grasp being as determinate, that is, as having some property or other, for otherwise we fall into the emptiness of pure being, the characterization of Dasein as possessing a quality is at the same time its characterization negatively as not possessing others. The red object is also essentially not-blue; it can only be grasped as red if it is grasped as not-blue.

So far so good. What may worry us is that Hegel seems to move from this unexceptionable point that all reality must be characterized contrastively, that in this sense determinate beings negate others, to the notion of determinate beings in a kind of struggle to maintain themselves in face of others, and hence as ‘negating’ each other in an active sense. And this connection is essential to his argument, as we shall see. Hegel’s reasoning is not entirely clear here, and the argument is differently laid out, with many more stages in WL than it is in EL. But I think we can attempt an interpretation of the underlying argument.

Although the quality by which we characterize a given Dasein may be defined in contrast to imaginary properties, that is, properties which are not instantiated, some of the contrasts on which we base our descriptions must be instantiated. In these cases, the contrast between Daseine as qualities is a contrast between distinct things: Hegel uses the word ‘something’ here (Etwas) – ‘Ding’ is reserved for a later stage. But when we talk of ‘something’ and not just qualities, we can see that they are not just related contrastively in our characterization of them, but that they also enter into a multiplicity of causal relations with each other, relations which form the causal background to their maintenance, their alteration, or their eventual disappearance. As being in causal interaction with other things, some of which are potentially destructive, a ‘something’ can be thought rather figuratively to be maintaining itself against the pressure of its surrounding, as a rigid body, for instance, maintains its shape against (some degree of) pressure and impact from surrounding bodies.

It might be thought, however, that the argument is getting a bit loose here, for we seem to be bringing in facts which may be well-attested by common sense, but which are not shown to be necessary features of being. Everybody knows that things in the world are in causal interaction, but we cannot claim to have derived this at the present stage. What is more embarassing, we could not claim to have done so explicitly, for the categories connected with cause are reserved by Hegel for a later point in the Logic, in the part on Essence. In fact, however, there appears to be an implicit set of considerations here, which being implicit are very unclearly expressed. They can perhaps be spelled out as follows:

Not only are the properties by which we characterize things defined contrastively, but it is also an essential part of their meaning that they characterize what they apply to in part in terms of its potential causal interactions with other things. To qualify something as hard is to say something about its penetrability, malleability, etc. in contact with other things; to qualify it as square is to say something about what it can fit snugly alongside of, and so on. This notion of our empirical property-language flies in the face of the Cartesian–empiricist tradition which from a basically contemplative picture of perception derived the model of purely phenomenal properties. The paradigms which seemed to fit best this model were properties available to only one sense, of which the most oft-quoted example was our set of colour terms.

Now it is very dubious if we can abstract purely phenomenal colour-terms from the web of properties by which we describe what we perceive. One can argue plausibly, for instance, that red looks different when it is seen as the colour of a Persian rug or of a vase, that in real perceived space, the visual cannot be disintricated from the tactile. But even if this point is left aside, it is clear that we cannot take our abstracted colour terms as the model for property terms in general, and that at least the great mass of these are understood in part by the type of interactions they attribute to what they are applied to.

Starting from this point, we can see another sense in which the quality of determinate being involves the negation of others. Not only is it defined contrastively, but it is also defined in part by the type of causal interactions with others which beings of this kind enter into, in which interactions the maintenance, alteration or destruction of the thing concerned is always at stake. With just a little bit of poetic licence, therefore, we can speak of its quality as defining the way in which a thing maintains itself or ultimately goes under in its environment, the way in which it ‘negates’ the potential ‘negations’ of others.

I believe that Hegel has both points in mind, both the contrastive and the interactive ‘negation’, perhaps undistinguished when he speaks of Something as the ‘the first negation of the negation’ (WL, I, 102); in this way adumbrating already with simple Dasein the principle of return to self in the other which comes to its fullest realization in the subject. This, of course, is central to Hegel’s ontology, that the lowliest form of being must be understood as an imperfect proto-form of the highest, which is subject (loc. cit.).

And both points seem to underlie the treatment of Etwas in the WL (I, 103–16). Hegel first makes the point that Something is necessarily in relation to another Something, in other words, that there must be some real contrasts. Indeed, we can say that each something is the other of some other. From this he moves to the view of Something as in interaction, and hence as having two aspects, what it is in itself (Ansich) and its being in relation to others (Seinfüranderes). Hegel’s point is that the two are inseparable, and he pauses to take a swipe at the Kantian notion of a Ding-an-sich (WL, 108), that is, an entity which would be out of relation with others, and particularly, with our knowledge of it. Here Hegel seems to rely on the interaction point, as he seemed also earlier in the PhG.2 Something which is meant to be characterized in abstraction from all interaction with others must remain for us utterly blank, undetermined, a nothing. To characterize Something must be to talk of its style of interaction with others.

How does Hegel come to establish that Etwas is in contradiction? By basing himself on this notion of negation; a Something can only be defined by reference to another with which it is contrasted. This other is its negation. And this negation is to be understood not simply in the contrastive sense, but in that of interaction: the other is the causal context against which Something must maintain itself, hence it is that which negates Something in the strongest sense, that which tends to suppress it. But then this means that Something is in essential relation to, can be thought in this sense to have within it, its own negation; it is hence in contradiction and doomed to disappear.

This argument arouses our suspicion, and rightly so. For it trades on a number of confusions. First the two senses of negation, the contrastive and the interactive, are elided in the term ‘frontier’ (Grenze). Something only has determinate being through its contrastive frontier with others. Its frontier is in this sense constitutive of it. ‘Something [Etwas] is only what it is in its frontier and through its frontier.’ (EL, § 92, Addition). The frontier is not to be understood in a quantitative sense as at the edge of an area. Rather the qualitative frontier ‘goes right through its entire existence’ (geht vielmehr durch das ganze Dasein hindurch, loc. cit.).

But this frontier is common with the other contrasted properties. It also defines and is constitutive of them. Hence in containing it each contains what negates it as well as what essentially constitutes it.

If we now shift to the other sense of frontier, that of interaction, we can give this ‘negation’ a concrete as well as just a contrastive logical sense, and it looks as though each entity essentially contains the seeds of its own destruction. But of course however much we may be tempted to speak of something containing its negation in the contrastive sense, when we move to the frontier at which things ‘negate’ each other by interaction, it is just false to say that each contains its own negation. Quite the contrary, to the extent that they maintain themselves, they hold their ‘negations’ off. If they fail to do so, of course, they go under, but they are not essentially determined to do so by the very way in which they are defined.

A field to use Hegel’s example (in EL, § 92) is contrastively defined, say, with a wood and a pond. It is also capable of being transformed into wood or bog through the seeds which are carried onto it or the water which drains onto it, and it only maintains itself thanks to its inhospitability to tree growth and its own drainage properties. But the sense in which wood or pond are essentially related to the meadow in its definition has nothing to do with their having gained or not gained a real foothold in it.

It certainly is bound up with the principle that things are necessarily in causal interaction with each other that they are always in principle open to alteration and destruction. In this minimal sense everything is mortal. But Hegel wishes to have more. He wants to show from conceptual necessity what we know from experience and from a deep intuition only, viz., that all things not only can in principle but do effectively pass away. He wants to show this because it is essential to his ontology that all finite things are in contradiction, in being finite embodiments of the infinite, and hence that they must go under. And it is this notion of contradiction and necessary demise which he draws as conclusion from the essential relation of Determinate Being to its other.

And in preparation for the ontological conclusion of this whole movement, Hegel calls this condition of mortal self-contradiction ‘finitude’.

When we say of things that they are finite, we mean thereby not only that they have a determinateness, that quality is reality and determination existing an sich,that they are merely limited – and hence still have determinate being beyond their frontier and their being. Finite things are; but their relation to themselves is this, that being negative they are self-related, and in this self-relation send themselves on beyond themselves and their being. They are, but the truth of this being is their end. The finite does not only change, like Something [Etwas]in general, but it perishes; and its perishing is not merely contingent, so that it could be without perishing. It is rather the very being of finite things, that they contain the seeds of perishing as their own being-in-self [Insichsein]: the hour of their birth is the hour of their death.

(WL, I, 116—17)3

We have here a second and much more important case in which Hegel forces his argument beyond what it can strictly yield, and ends up with what is really an interpretation of things powerfully suggestive of his ontology, rather than a strict demonstration of it. The fact that everything passes away can be seen as the manifestation of an inner self-negation. We can draw on this and other facts about the world to suggest Hegel’s vision of things.

But Hegel is aiming and must aim at much more. Not only is the contradiction, as with all stages of the dialectic, meant to be the object of a strict proof. But as a contradiction in the very concept of Determinate Being, it shows the demise of finite things, as well as their dependence on a larger whole (which Hegel will call the ‘infinite’ as we shall see in a minute), to be a matter of conceptual necessity. For both the passing away and the ontological dependence of the finite exist to resolve a conceptual contradiction, and hence obtain of rational necessity.

The necessity in Hegel’s system, as we saw in the last chapter, is powered by contradiction. And that is why this discussion of Dasein as finitude plays a crucial role in the whole argument of the Logic. It is the charter of the necessary inter-relation of things. We can think of the structure of the world as necessary, because finite things being contradictory are linked to the whole of necessity.

The contradiction in the finite is meant to be based on this: being must be determinate, as we saw in the opening dialectic. To exist is to exist with a certain determinate nature, as against other possible ones. Determinacy is a criterial property of reality. And since there is no doubt that there is reality (of some kind or other), there must be determinate being. Or to put it another way, since ‘being’ must have application, and since it can only apply as determinate, then ‘determinate Being’ must have application.

But then we discover that to be determinate is to contain one’s negation within oneself. And whatever contains its own negation cannot survive. Thus the very determination which reality must have in order to be tends to annul it. It is contradictory; and this contradiction affects its very concept. We are not just talking of some accidental conflict of requirements where, e.g., some medicine I must take for one malady tends to aggravate another. This is a conflict of requirements which obtains in virtue of contingent facts about me.

But here we are talking about a conflict of criterial properties of ‘reality’ or ‘being’, a concept which must apply. Being must be determinate, and at the same time it must avoid annulment. So that the conflict is conceptual, necessary, that is, a contradiction in the full sense; and it is also in things. That is why the movement it powers in finite things is conceptually necessary, as is their relation to a larger whole.

An indispensable concept has an incoherent application. We can see now why Hegel looked on the Kantian antinomies as examples of a pervasive conflict which his Logic would lay bare. But he will not take Kant’s line that the incoherence is in our way of representing reality rather than in the things themselves. And indeed, Kant’s line is unavailable here. For we are not just dealing with concepts like ‘divisibility ‘or ‘limit ‘which we could plausibly argue pertain to a representation of things in time and space which is all we mortals can attain to. The contradiction we have uncovered touches ‘Being’, that is, the concept of reality in general.

Hegel’s argument here is thus of ontological import. It would be of immense consequence if valid. But unfortunately in linking determinateness to self-annulment it builds, as we saw, on an equivocation on the concept of negation, and this is fatal to the argument. What Hegel in the end gives us is rather a portrayal of the mutability of all reality as springing from an inner conflict, a negation of self. But powerfully suggestive though it is the language of self-contradiction is not established by a strict proof. The only status it can successfully claim is that of a more or less persuasive gloss on the facts of finitude.

Hegel goes on to discuss the contradiction in things as ‘finitude’. And in taking up this notion he presents another account of their necessary demise, which is the obverse of the earlier one. In striving to maintain themselves, things struggle to overcome their negation. Now its frontier, as we have seen, is the negation of a finite thing; it therefore strives to go beyond its frontier. But since the frontier is also that which defines it and hence constitutes it, its over-stepping of the frontier is its dissolution, or its transformation into something entirely different. This way of putting it, of course, trades on the same confusion as the above: the sense in which a thing in developing or maintaining itself might be thought to be pushing back a frontier of interaction has no intrinsic connection whatever with the abolition of a qualitative frontier. But this way of putting things presents the drive towards destruction as coming from the thing itself, and from its striving to realize itself fully; and this, of course, is a way of putting it which suits the underlying ontological conclusions which Hegel is edging towards, that finite things disappear precisely because they are attempts to embody the infinite, that death is thus their fruition.

Hegel puts this latter account of the contradiction in other language; the frontier (Grenze) here is called a ‘limit’ or ‘barrier’ (Schranke), and the inner drive to fulfilment is called ‘ought’ (Sollen). These particular terms are of course introduced to allow a reference to the errors of Kant and Fichte, whose ethics and metaphysic is bound up with the notion of a goal which we are bound to seek but can never realize. In particular, Hegel’s criticism of Kant’s ethic, as we have seen, is that Kant is thought to have presented an opposition between nature and obligation such that men must ever attempt to make the former correspond with the latter, to make the world over and their own sensibility in line with the moral law and the dictates of conscience; but that they cannot succeed on pain of collapsing the distinction between the two and hence doing away with the moral law and with duty.4 This dilemma of Kantian morality is much commented on by Hegel, and it obviously provides the model for the depiction of the contradiction between Sollen and Schranke here, an ‘ought’ that must destroy the distinction on which it is founded in order to realize itself.

Infinity
The use of the word ‘Sollen’ is enough to warn us if we did not know already that we have not reached the end term of this movement. For the type of finitude which is bound up with the ‘ought’ is the kind that breeds as a corresponding term the ‘bad’ infinite, by which Hegel means a form of infinity which is not encompassable, which is not held together in a coherent structure, hence boundless in another sense. We can remind ourselves here that the Hegelian notion of infinity is of a whole which is not conditioned or bounded by something else; but this does not mean that the infinite has no structure or shape; it means only that there is no relation to anything outside. An infinite universe is thus not necessarily boundless, rather it can be an ordered whole whose elements are only related to each other. This is indeed for Hegel the true notion of the infinite, the notion ontologically founded in the nature of infinite spirit. It is opposed to the infinite as simply the limitless, the indefinite extension which has no inner unity.

The true infinite for Hegel thus unites finite and infinite; and this in two ways. First he refuses to see the finite and the infinite as separate and over against each other, for in that case since they cannot fail to be related, the infinite would be related to something which was not itself, and hence would not be infinite. The infinite must thus englobe the finite. At its most basic level this reflects Hegel’s option for an absolute which is not separate from or beyond the world but includes it as its embodiment.

But secondly, the infinite cannot just include the finite as the endless progress includes the individual terms which make it up. In Hegel’s sense this too would be a failure to unite finite and infinite, since the unity could never be consummated. However far one takes an infinite progress, there is always more to go. On this model the infinite can never be an ordered whole in which the various finite elements have a necessary place.

The Hegelian notion of the infinite is therefore that of an infinite life embodied in a circle of finite beings, each of which is inadequate to it and therefore goes under, but is replaced in a necessary order by another, the whole series not being boundless but closed on itself in a circle. Such is the circle of categories which make up the logic, the circle of levels of being which make up the philosophies of nature and spirit, the circle of roles which make up the state. Such ordered wholes are not related to anything outside themselves. The elements are indeed finite and perishable, while the whole is infinite and eternal. But there is no separation between the two, because the infinite only exists in the necessary order of the finite.

This is the conception of the infinite to which Hegel will now take us. Dasein as determinate being which necessarily goes under is finitude. The determinate thing is related to others outside it both statically, in contrast and interaction with other finite things, and dynamically, in that it goes under and is replaced by others. But this calls for another category. The finite as so defined cannot subsist on its own, for finite being always refers us beyond itself. We need another category to encompass the whole of reality, or reality as self-subsistent.

Let us call this new category ‘infinity’. We will then agree that it cannot be thought of as something which exists beyond the finite. First because we have seen that non-finite, non-determinate being is equivalent to nothing, and so such an infinite would be empty. Secondly because this empty infinite would have something outside itself, as we have just argued, and hence would not be the true infinite, and not a concept of the whole. This infinite would be finite. But nor can we think of it as the merely boundless. For this too would fail to give us a concept of a self-subsistent whole. The finite is dependent on other things, both at any moment of time and also in that it issues out of other finite things. But relations of dependence cannot stretch on forever for otherwise nothing would ever come to be. As we trace out relations of dependence we must eventually come to a whole which is self-subsistent, which is not dependent on anything outside.

The concept of the infinite must thus be that of the whole system of finite things and their relations which is not itself dependent or limited by anything else. This infinite includes the finite, it is in a sense identical with the finite, but it is also an encompassable whole.

I take this to be the nub of Hegel’s argument, although it is not set out in these terms, and it is not entirely clear what he means. The argument against the empty infinite beyond is clear enough, but the crucial transition in both versions of the logic is that from the bad infinite of endless progress to the true infinite. The bad infinite presents us an endless series of finite things, each of which disappears as it must and is replaced by another. The passage to the true infinite comes when we see that each something which disappears is replaced by another finite something. There is identity in the change: ‘it follows that Something [Etwas] in its passage into other only joins with itself’5 (so geht hiermit Etwas in seinem Übergehen in Anderes nur mit sich selbst zusammen, EL, § 95). This is ‘true infinity’ (die wahrhafte Unendlichkeit).

I understand this transition as follows: if we contemplate the succession of finite things where each passes and is succeeded by another, we are eventually forced to shift our central point of reference from the particular ephemeral finite things to the continuing process which goes on through their coming to be and passing away. This is the identity in difference. But the locus of this process is not any particular finite thing, but the whole system of limited, ephemeral things.

This passage from a notion of a limited, dependent reality to the complementary notion of a self-subsistent whole is a step which Hegel will take a number of times in the course of the Logic. It is a crucial weapon in his armoury. And he uses it here to good effect. But Hegel’s category of infinity which he derives here is considerably richer than we may be willing to warrant on the basis of his argument. That the notion of the finite and dependent requires a complementary notion of the whole may be readily granted. But Hegel’s ‘infinity’ is not just the notion of a whole but of a whole whose inner articulation and process unfolds of necessity.

Thus Hegel speaks of this insight of the unity of finite and infinite as the discovery of ‘Ideality’ (EL, § 95). We come to the fullest understanding of things when we relate them to a necessity whose formula is expressed in Idea, in something close to the Platonic sense. Hence ‘the truth of the infinite is…its ideality’, and ‘true philosophy therefore is always idealism’ (jede wahrhafte Philosophie ist deswegen Idealismus, loc. cit.)

What licences this stronger conclusion is the earlier argument we examined above which shows the finite as the locus of contradiction. If the infinite is the whole system of changes which the finite undergoes, and if these changes are powered by contradiction, then the inner process of the infinite is governed by necessity.

Let us examine this a little more closely. A finite thing goes under of necessity. But in going under it does not simply disappear. The negation from which it suffers is itself a determinate one, and hence in breaking up it is replaced by another determinate thing – e.g., wood which is burnt becomes smoke and ash. In any case, we cannot think of determinate things as just disappearing, because being as we saw must be determinate, and since Being is an indispensable concept, so is Dasein.6

Thus the demise of one finite thing is the birth of another. This is where ordinary non-speculative thought tries to evade the issue. When it rises to an intuition of the inescapable mortality of finite things (even though it does not see the contradiction), it naturally thinks of the finite as sustained by an infinite being who is beyond finitude. This being would replace finite things as they go under. But this kind of infinite being is impossible on Hegel’s argument. First of all he could not be without being finite, i.e. determinate. And secondly, he is really surreptitiously defined as determinate since he is contrasted to the finite. The notion of such an infinite being is a contradiction.

Hence infinity, the self-subsistent whole which we are forced to assume once we grasp the mortality of the finite, can only be the whole system of changing determinate beings. There is no foundation for finite things outside the system of the finite. Hence there is no source outside the system on which we can draw to explain the coming to be of new finite things. Their coming to be is just the passing away of their predecessors.

But the predecessor goes under of conceptual necessity. For its demise is the resolution of a contradiction. Hence the successor comes to be of conceptual necessity. But all finite things are the successors of some others. So that not only the passing away but the coming to be of finite things happens of necessity.

Thus the infinite as the whole system of changing finite things is the unfolding of conceptual necessity, for these things change and deploy themselves in a perpetual attempt to resolve contradiction. Contradiction is the motor of things. And it touches everything, so that everything is swept along in a perpetual becoming (WL, I, 138). The infinite can only be the whole, and what remains identical is the formula of necessity which runs through the whole circle of changes.

Because of this inner necessity, the infinite is not just the whole in the sense that it is a collection of finite things from which nothing has been left out, or a group of finite things which are in contingent causal interaction. It is a totality, a whole whose parts are intrinsically related to each other, that is, where each can only be understood by its relations to the others. For these parts, or finite things, arise and succeed each other by conceptual necessity. Thus Hegel’s conception of the contradiction of the finite, which we saw went beyond what his argument could sustain, is already having important consequences. It makes all the difference between seeing the whole as a contingent grouping of finite things, and seeing it as a totality which deserves to be called ‘infinite’ in Hegel’s sense of the term, and in which the finite is seen as having its truth in the Idea.

Because of this Hegel’s notion of infinity already contains the essential character of his ontological vision and of the final category of the Logic, the Idea. It is a self-subsistent system whose structure is determined by conceptual necessity, and which is embodied in finite things.

But Infinity is still a poor and abstract version of the Idea. For we only know that it has a necessary structure deployed in space and time. We have not yet been able to define the articulations of this structure. This will come with further and richer categories of the Logic.

In moving from Dasein to Infinity, we have shifted the centre of gravity of reality. Instead of seeing it as simply one particular thing, we see it rather as centred in a process which runs through the transformations, the coming to be and passing away of many things. And this is in line with the whole development of the logic, whereby each stage takes us further towards inwardness, that is, further towards a notion of being as centred on itself, as inwardly articulated and deploying its autonomous activity, in short as closer and closer to the model of the subject. The first notion of Etwas as a negation of negation, as a self-maintaining being, already set us on this path; now we take a further step, we uncover a deeper centre whose activity is deployed not just in the maintenance of this thing, but in the ordered series of transformations, comings to be and passings away. We have a negation of negation at a deeper level, a more all-embracing unity, and hence a greater degree of inwardness; or otherwise put a deeper level of connection between things, now underlying not just the maintenance of disparate things but the transformations from one to the other.

Hence the first movement of the logic closes with Hegel having established (to his own satisfaction) his basic ontological vision of finite being as the vehicle for an infinite life which is not separate from it, and this from the basic starting point that being must be determinate to be. The dialectic of Being engenders Dasein, and Dasein as a mixture of reality and negation, being and non-being, is interpreted as inherently contradictory, hence as containing its own destruction. This contradictory self-destructive nature is finitude, but the drive to dissolution is interpreted as a transcending of the barrier and hence as a drive to infinity, which is then seen as the life inherent in the coming to be and passing away of the finite. Hence Being and Non-being not only unite in Dasein, but also in Becoming as was intimated perhaps a little prematurely in the first dialectic.

### II: QUANTITY
In the last chapter of ‘Quality’, entitled ‘Fürsichsein’, Hegel makes the transition to quantity. This transition may seem a little strained, which in fact it is. It offers another example of a twist we have often noticed in the Hegelian dialectic: where Hegel ‘goes back’ from the advanced point he has reached in order to take up and ‘feed into’ his dialectic some other important range of concepts or transitions.

This would seem to be the case here, for what has arisen out of Dasein is as we saw a notion of infinite life which continues in the coming to be and passing away of Dasein, of reality as related to ‘ideality’. Hence we have the idea of a being which survives the demise of this quality. To use more Hegelian language, we have a being which negates its particular determinations, or which returns to itself out of the other by which it is determined (‘ unendliche Rückkehr in sich’ WL, I, 147), or which is ‘simple relation to itself’ (einfache Beziehung auf sich WL, I, 147).

This is the Hegelian notion of Fürsichsein, Being-for-self, the stage we have now reached, and not surprisingly Hegel cites the ‘I’ of subjectivity as a paradigm example. For the subject as consciousness has a certain object before him, and as self-consciousness has a certain set of characteristics, but he ‘returns to himself’ out of these in the sense that he cannot be identified with them, that objects and characteristics change through the life of this identical person. Of course the human subject eventually goes under himself, and the highest example of Fürsichsein is the absolute subject whose life continues through the entire range of changes in external reality.

All this may be clear enough in Hegelian terms: we seem in Fürsichsein to have derived the notion of the subject as life vehicled by the coming to be and passing away of its external embodiment. But this is not where we want to get at this stage of the Logic; rather this will come in its proper place in the third book. What we want to derive at this stage is simply Quantity.

Hegel therefore steps in to direct the traffic. He reminds us that we are still at the level of Being, that it is we are still looking on reality as undimensional simple being, not that is, as emanation or manifestation of something. This will come only in the second book, on Essence. Hence it cannot be a question of entertaining the notion of the subject here. But if we transpose this fuller notion into the poorer context of simple being, we do derive a new form which can be the starting point of a new dialectic.

This new form is simple being, but what it retains of the subject, what justifies its being called ‘Fürsichsein’, is its negation of its specific determination. It is a being picked out as such without any specific quality. But this is not a return to the indeterminacy of pure Being from which the Logic started, claims Hegel, for this indeterminacy is posited by the self-relation of Fürsichsein, it has arisen out of the dialectic. In this of course, Hegel seems to be having his cake and eating it, retaining those prerogatives of the subject he needs for his argument, while remaining in the sphere of Being; but let us waive this objection in order to follow his argument.7

Now this being, Hegel calls ‘the one’; and we can see the underlying logic of this, even if Hegel’s derivation seems much more fanciful. For a being of this kind can only be picked out, that is, distinguished from others, by some numeration-like procedure. In other words, we can only identify a particular being of this kind by attributing to it some number in a series, or some ordinal position. For all beings of this kind are identical in being without determinate quality, they can only be distinguished numerically.

Of course, in this argument I am taking for granted that identifying ‘the one’ is the same as distinguishing it from others, that a being of this kind is only conceivable as one among many. How else can a being without internal differentiation be identified, except in contrast with others? The absolute spirit in his full manifestation is, indeed, must be identified without contrast; but his life is the necessary inter-relation of rich and varied realities, whose identification in contrast to each other poses no problem. But what has no internal differentiation cannot be identified by what it contains or includes: it can thus only be picked out by what it ‘negates’. This was the case with Dasein, which being identified with a simple quality was undifferentiated, and hence had to be contrasted to others to be determinate. But here, the one is not only undifferentiated but without specific quality; it cannot be contrasted qualitatively to others, only numerically. ‘The one’ must exist as one among many.

This argument brings us to Quantity. But although it might be thought to underlie Hegel’s reasoning here, his derivation of Quantity takes quite another form. It passes rather through the notions of repulsion and attraction, which Hegel following Kant thought were essential to physics (and hence worth while deriving as stages in the Logic).

This is another example of a detour to take in what Hegel judges to be essential notions. The derivation of repulsion, which we cannot go into here, turns on the idea that the one in negating its own qualitative determination has a ‘negative relation to itself’. Hence the one must become many. But at the same time the many which spring from the one are after all identical, homogeneous. The relation of each to the others is also a self-relation. Hence there is attraction as well.

Before deriving repulsion (in the WL) Hegel connects the idea of the one with the philosophy of atomism, as put forward by Democritus. Atoms are indeed, ‘ones’ in this sense, for they are internally undifferentiated and quite qualityless, in that they offer absolutely no qualitative contrast to each other. Hegel tries to account for the idea that atoms are in a void in terms of his notion of the one: the one is quality-less, is empty, is itself in that sense void; it remains only to separate the two moments of the one, its affirmative being and its emptiness, in order to posit atoms in a surrounding void.

But atomism offers us an inadequate notion of the ones, because it conceives their relation to each other, their combination, as purely contingent; as a contingent fact, some atoms ‘swerve’, and hence encounter others; whereas in reality, the ones can only exist in relation to each other. It is this necessary relatedness which Hegel tries to make explicit with the notions of repulsion and attraction.

But I think that the crucial transition to Quantity is best put in the more general terms that I introduced above, of distinction and homogeneity; and Hegel himself introduces general terms which are not far removed from these in his own treatment of quantity, viz. continuous and discontinuous. For to see things as made up of distinct and homogeneous elements is to see them as measurable, as quantifiable.

Thus for Hegel, Quantity is defined as ‘pure being, in which the determinateness is no longer posited as at one with the being itself, but rather as annulled or indifferent’ (EL, § 99). The crucial word here is ‘indifferent’ (gleichgültig): qualitatively considered, the determinateness or limit of a thing is not a matter of indifference; if we alter the limit, we alter the nature of the thing; but considered purely quantitatively, the limits of a thing can be altered without changing its nature; it is ‘indifferent’ to them. It is thus a mark of the quantitative, says Hegel, that we are dealing with such indifferent limits, that the things can increase or decrease in extension without changing their nature.

Now this presupposes that we can treat the reality thus dealt with as homogeneous, that is, not partitioned by qualitative differences, and also as divisible into units, i.e., into distinct ‘ones’. Hence in deriving the distinction and homogeneity of the ones, we have derived the category of Quantity.

This double feature of reality considered quantitatively, which I have called homogeneity and distinction, and which Hegel discussed at the end of the last chapter in connection with attraction and repulsion, he introduces here in the first chapter on Quantity as continuity and discreteness. These are both ‘moments’ of Quantity, for reality quantitatively considered must be homogeneous (that is continuous), and yet we must be able to draw a line at any point and measure it up to there; that is, it must be capable of being cut up (in our measuring procedures if not in the flesh) into discrete units.

The problem is just that reality considered purely quantitatively can be carved up in a number of ways. In purely quantitative terms, there is no ground for dividing it in one place rather than another. Hegel makes it clear that merely quantitative, mathematical terms are inadequate to express any philosophical truth. And we can see why: to see things in quantitative terms is to see them as homogeneous and particulate; whereas for Hegel speculative truths concern articulated wholes; their basic stock in trade is conceptual opposition. Hence the belief that we can understand the world in quantitative terms is bound up with materialism; for only matter is appropriately understood in terms of quantity (as well as time and space, of course). But materialism is bound to miss all the important connections which express the necessary structure of the world.

Hegel hence has a low view of mathematics as a philosophical language, Mathematics takes us beyond merely sensible observation; but it gives us only the most external, i.e. non-conceptual, relations.

But even granted the poverty of mathematics, how does the characterization of things in quantitative terms lead us to a contradiction, and hence to higher categories? Hegel comes to this in the third part of the second chapter on Quantity. Here he takes up the feature we mentioned earlier viz., that quantitatively considered, things are indifferent to their limits, there is no ground for dividing them in one place rather than in another. In the section considered here, Hegel puts this point in a way reminiscent of the discussion of Quality: a quantum cannot but alter its limit, it unavoidably becomes greater or smaller, and hence another quantum. But this process has no natural stopping place, hence the self-alteration of the quantum is an endless progress, just as the self-othering of Dasein was. And like that latter process, Hegel seems to consider this one as contradictory, as requiring some resolution.

But one might think that Hegel is a little cavalier in his transitions here. Granted that Quantity is the realm in which things are indifferent to their limit, how does that show that quanta must go beyond themselves, and change? (whatever this means). And even if they do so endlessly, even granted Hegel’s dislike for the ‘bad’ infinity of the endless progress, does this show a contradiction requiring resolution by a higher category?

One can perhaps make sense of this Hegelian way of putting the matter, if we recall to mind that we are dealing here with categories of transcendental logic, that is categories by which we can grasp reality; and we are testing them to see if they can offer us a way of grasping reality coherently. It will be remembered that it was against this yardstick that pure being failed, and showed itself to be synonymous with nothing. And the same requirements, we might argue, show purely quantitative characterizations to be radically inadequate.

The argument might go something like this: to characterize things purely quantitatively would be to be able to describe everything in terms of combinations of homogeneous, i.e. qualitatively indistinguishable units. This is the dream of atomists, be they physical or logical. But even this dream in any conceivably realizable form would have to re-introduce quality. For there must be some grounds for picking out one set of combinations of units rather than others. Let us say I pick out object A which contains, say, 100 units and object B which contains 50. Now what reason did I have for drawing the limits here, for delineating an object grouping these 100 units together, and not, say, rather 101 or 99? These reasons, the criteria for ‘A’ and ‘B’, cannot be stated in terms of numbers of units, for the question concerns the grouping of units into aggregates of a certain number, viz. 100 or 50. We have to introduce some other range of descriptive concepts in order to express the criteria; let us say, that this group of 100 is bunched together away from the rest, or that 50 forms a certain shape.

This point is unaffected by the consideration that we may characterize the world in an indefinite number of different ways, and hence in our imaginary situation, groups units in an indefinite number of ways: our A, for instance, might also be described as an M and an N grouping respectively 88 and 12 units; and so on. For in any case, if there are any reasons for carving the world up in any given way, they can only be given by introducing other ranges of descriptive concept than that of units and aggregates of units. Rather, this point of the plurality of ways of characterizing things re-inforces the argument. For the distinction between two different ways of characterizing things can only be given in terms of the different ranges of concept appropriate to each.

Hence it is that any thoroughgoing conceptual atomism, to give a name to the view we are considering here, must burke the issue of how we characterize things, that is, group units. It must imagine a phenomenal world in which there are no groupings at all, or what is the same thing, in which any groupings we make are utterly arbitrary in the sense that nothing at all can be said concerning the principle of such grouping – a sort of super-nominalist doctrine. But this is plainly impossible. For unless the only things we allowed in this strange imaginary phenomenal world of the conceptual atomist were those consisting of single units, in which case there would be only one kind of thing, hence no qualitative concepts at all (because no contrast), and hence no kind of thing, (i.e. we fall back into the emptiness of pure Being), we would have to allow entities which were aggregates of units. But then there would have to be some criteria for singling out aggregates of n units as a given kind of thing, other than their simply having n units. For there could be no sense to recognizing, say, a thing of 100 units, and saying ‘there’s an A’ unless As had other properties than just that of containing as aggregates 100 units, e.g. that As grouped these units in a certain way, or a certain shape. For in anyone’s field at any time there would undoubtedly be hundreds, if not thousands of such units, on any plausible interpretation of a universal atomic element, and hence if A just meant 100 units, it could never fail to be given.

Of course, this imaginary phenomenal world is rather weird, so far removed is it from our actual one, which is full of qualitative diversity, so that we find it very difficult to imagine such a reduction of all things to a single type of element. Even the reductions achieved by the more successful sciences, the real atomism of physics, say, have no relation to an atomism of aggregation out of homogeneous units, even though they may reduce seemingly diverse phenomena to a single explanatory base. The aim of the above excursus was just to show how the characterization of things in purely quantitative terms, that is, without introducing any qualitative distinctions, or plurality of descriptive concepts, is impossible.

And the motive for this rather far-fetched demonstration is that I believe something of this underlies the Hegelian argument here. In the argument as we have seen Hegel moves from the thesis that reality quantitatively considered (for short, the quantum) can alter its limits arbitrarily, to the thesis that it must do so; and he sees in this a contradiction. ‘According to its quality, therefore, a quantum is posited in absolute continuity with its externality and otherness. Thus it not only can go beyond every determinate magnitude, it not only can be altered, but it is posited that it must alter’ (WL, I, 221, italics in original). And a little above, Hegel speaks of ‘contradiction’ (Widerspruch).

Now this move from ‘can’ to ‘must’ is comprehensible if we understand that what we are seeking here is a set of categories which will allow us to grasp things coherently, and if as we have seen a purely quantitative characterization cannot give us an adequate specification of a thing. In purely quantitative terms, there is no reason to place a limit anywhere. Now we can put this by saying that quanta can see their ‘size-determination’ altered, in the sense that there is no reason to stop this. But we can just as well say that there is no basis to speak of fixed quanta at all; any given size we attribute to a quantum is totally arbitrary. We might just as well pick any other. Hence to say that quanta can change is misleading; for it implies that there are quanta which also can perhaps remain the same; whereas in fact there is absolutely no ground to single out any fixed quanta at all; there is no sense to the idea that a quantum remains the same. And this point can be expressed (misleadingly, it is true, but not more so than in the ‘can’ formula) by saying that the quantum must change, that ‘it is now posited in itself to refer beyond itself and to become another’ (WL, I, 222).8

The contradiction can also be understood if we put this discussion in the basic context of the Logic, which we recalled above: our aim is to grasp some reality, to give an adequate specification of a thing, here in quantitative terms; and the specification we give, the quantum, turns out not to be one, turns out to be quite indeterminate in its limits. Intended as a specification, the quantum can never succeed, and hence is doomed to defeat its own purpose. Like ‘being’ (and ultimately for some of the same reasons) quantitative concepts have to be supplemented by other categories if they are to be applied to reality.

My interpretation could seem wide of the mark. For Hegel uses a quite different idiom in speaking of this transition. He speaks of the quantum being driven beyond its limits to another quantum, and this quantum in turn suffering the same fate, so that it is involved in an endless progress. But I think that this image (how Hegel would have disliked this word, but no other seems appropriate) itself can be understood in the light of the interpretation: what drives the quantum on to its endless alterations is the search for an adequate specification in purely quantitative terms, a search whose object always eludes it, and which for this reason is endless.

The fact that he puts the contradiction in the form of an endless progress enables Hegel to present his solution in a familiar mould. After launching a broadside against those who see something sublime in the quantitatively endless e.g., astronomers who contemplate the heavens (and of course, Kant comes in for more punishment for a passage about the heavens in the Critique of Practical Reason and even more for his application of the idea of endless progress to the sphere of morals), and after a critique of the Kantian first antinomy, Hegel then comes to a solution similar to the one he found to the endless progress of Dasein: for quantum is always moving on into another one; it must therefore find a way of returning to itself in this other; and this it can do if we conceive it as the term of a relation between two quanta.

Hegel here comes to the solution which he develops through the third chapter of this section, and which fully developed is the object of the third part of Being, Measure. Measure is the return of quantity into quality at a higher level, a level which involves the synthesis of the two. The idea is that although a thing cannot be specified in terms of a single quantum, it can be in terms of a relation between quanta. Hegel is thinking, as is evident in the later discussion on measure, of the functional laws of natural science, linking two or more variables. We can return to a specification of a thing’s quality or nature, in a much fuller and richer form, when we can characterize it in terms of some functional law or relation. We achieve in this way the synthesis of quality and quantity; we achieve quantitatively defined quality.

But the point to be made in relation to the above interpretation is that in introducing the relation between quanta, we have gone beyond the homogeneous universe of conceptual atomism. The two or more quanta which are related are measurements of two or more different things, properties or dimensions, that is they are distinguished by more than having a different number of units (if indeed, they have a different number of units – the length and depth of a square are equal in extent, but distinct). It is this escape from unidimensionality which allows the quantum to fix on a determinate size. To return to our above example: we pick out these 100 units as an A, because the units are at distance d from each other. Hence we have a reason for grouping these 100 units as an A, because 100 is the number of units which are grouped together so as to be distance d from each other. As are then defined by a relation between quanta, as aggregates of units which are all a certain distance from each other; and the quantum 100 is fixed here because it is one term of a relation of which the other is d. The introduction of a second dimension (which here is also quantified, but that is not essential) allows us to motivate our grouping of the units in our original dimension. I believe that it is this important property of pluri-dimensionality – operating with more than one dimension – which accounts for Hegel’s solution of the infinite progress here: * The quantum is thus posited as self-repelled; there are thus two quanta, which are however cancelled [aufgehoben] and exist only as moments of one unity, and this unity is the determinateness of the quantum’ (WL, I, 239). But of course, I need hardly repeat that this is not his argument as we see it in the text: rather he reaches this by the familiar argument that the quantum returns to itself, and hence finds its own moment in its beyond, i.e., the other quanta into which it is constantly turning: and this self-identity in other quanta is quickly re-interpreted as the unity of two related quanta mentioned above, which forms the basis for the third chapter and the entire synthesis between quantity and quality that we find in the section on Measure.

### III: MEASURE
Understanding reality in the category of Measure is thus understanding qualities which are founded on certain quantities or relations between quanta. As a very simple example, we have water which must have a temperature between 0° and 100° C, turning else into ice or steam. We have here the simple unity between quality and quantity which defines measure, the quanta 0° and 100° C are picked out as significant because of the qualitative changes which occur at these limits, and these qualitative changes are accounted for by the changes in temperature. We have thus the relation between two property dimensions, the state of the substance and its temperature, which we saw in the above discussion to be essential to quantitative characterization.

We have thus in a sense returned to quality in this third section of the Logic of Being, but on a higher level on which it is united with quantity; for we see properties as reposing now on quantitative values. This category of Measure is also of universal application: ‘Everything which exists has a measure’ (Alles was da ist, hat ein Maß, WL, I, 343). We are reminded of the Greek preoccupation with measure, but also of modern physics and chemistry which has uncovered in a host of fields the limits within which things must remain to retain the same qualitative character.

But this category, too, while universal is radically inadequate. Hegel cannot accept that the quantitative characterization of things, even united as it is with quality in Measure, touches more than the surface of things. It cannot penetrate to the core of reality. And to penetrate to the core is to enter into the dialectic relation of inner and outer, both identical and yet opposed to each other, which is central to Hegel’s ontology. We make the transition to this type of characterization in the present section, introducing us to the Logic of Essence where we shall no longer be dealing with the one-tiered categories of Being, but with two-tiered ones.

The argument in WL is very complex and is closely tied in detail to the sciences of Hegel’s day and his view about them. It touches on themes which will re-appear in the Philosophy of Nature. But in EL the argument is very economically set out. It is simply a continuation of the considerations underlying the transition from Quantity. Measure is the immediate unity of Quality and Quantity (§ 108), as such it is also simple quantum, and hence susceptible to increase and decrease. But beyond certain limits this increase or decrease abolishes the quality, it pushes us beyond into the ‘measureless’ (das Maßlose). This new state is, however, itself a new quality; so we return to Measure. But this new measure can again be overstepped, and so forth in a (potentially) endless regress (§ 109) (e.g., ice changing to water, changing to steam). But since we always return to quality and measure, albeit a different one, we shouldn’t look on this change as an endless progress of new terms, but rather as an identity in difference. ‘But Measure shows itself.. .to remain just as much together with itself in its transition.’ (Das Maß zeigt sich aber.. .eben so sehr nur mit sich selbst zusammenzugehen, § 110).

We recognize here the same argument-type as underlies the transition from all three sections of the Logic of Being. First the finitude of the entity under consideration (Etwas in the first section, quantum in the second), i.e., the fact that it goes under if taken beyond a certain limit, is presented as an inner necessity; but its going under is the birth of something else (the other in the first section, a new quantum in the second). This yields the prospect of an endless progress of terms. This (to Hegel) unacceptable result is avoided by recognizing a unity in difference between the different phases of this necessary change.

But this conception of things gives birth to a two-tiered notion of reality, of a substrate which underlies changing states. It is the variants of this conception which we are to explore in the second book. In a sense we were already there with the derivation of true infinity in the first section; but we put off entering the promised land because we had to integrate Quantity into our synthesis, for the encyclopaedic reasons already discussed. We thus took as it were a sideways step, via Fürsichsein, to Quantity.

The dialectic of Measure, by contrast, is continuous with that of Quantity, it is the prolongation of it, through the same considerations – the instability of Quantum, the resulting endless progress, and the solution of identity in difference – to the ultimate resolution in a two-tiered conception of reality.

With Measure we have a characterization of things as of a certain quality which is grounded on their falling within certain quantitative limits. The introduction of this quality-concept gives the reason for our fixing on the particular quanta which define the limits, while these quanta account for the thing’s having the quality it does. But Hegel seems to say, quanta thus linked with qualities in Measure are themselves driven beyond themselves just as simple quanta were. How are we to understand this?

In somewhat the same way, I would suggest: the characterization in terms of Measure is also in a sense inadequate, not quite in the same way as the above, that it falls below the minimum complexity required to have a world at all of which we can be conscious, but rather in this way, that the characterization in Measure terms necessarily goes along with another, deeper one, which goes beyond Measure. For we are speaking of things which have a certain quality while they remain within certain quantitative limits; but this means that we are no longer talking only of entities which are identified by a certain property such that if this property ceases to hold they cease to be; we are also talking of entities of which we can say that they lose what we have up to now thought of as defining properties and gain others. The category of Measure is what makes the transition: for in it we see what was hitherto a defining property as grounded on the entity concerned being within certain limits. We see water, for instance, (H2O in its liquid state) as grounded on the temperature’s being between 0° and 100° C. But once we think of the entity as having to remain within certain limits, then we have introduced a new notion of the entity, viz., that of an entity of which it can be predicated that it is within certain limits, and therefore of which it can be predicated as well that it is beyond these limits. We have introduced a notion of an entity which is deeper than any of the hitherto defining properties, an underlying substrate which can be in a number of states (Zustände), which states are defined by these properties. Thus to follow our above example, once we say of the water of everyday perception that it must remain within 0° and 100° C, else it becomes ice or steam, we are introducing a more fundamental entity, let us call it H2O, which while it is within these limits is in such a state that we call it water, and when it is beyond these limits is in the states we call ice or steam.

Thus the characterization of things in Measure terms refers us beyond to a characterization of reality in terms of substrate entities which can be in a number of states, that is, the measure characterization only makes sense if this deeper one does too. This is how I propose to interpret the Hegelian argument that quantitative characterization in measure ‘is itself as such the act of stepping beyond itself’ (das Hinausschreiten über sich selbst, EL, § 109, Addition), the thesis of the inherent necessity to overstep the limit. And if this interpretation is correct, then we can undertand at the same time why this stepping over the limit is also an identity in difference, a ‘joining with itself’ (zusammengehen mit sich selbst); for the deeper substrate entity is just that which is identical through the changes in state.

In being led to introduce the substrate entity which can enter and leave many states we have taken the major step which leads out of Being into Essence. The categories which Hegel groups in the first book, on Being, all characterize things simply, in one-tiered concepts: Etwas is identified with its defining quality, the quantum with its degree. In Essence on the other hand, we will have to do throughout with two-tiered concepts of an underlying reality and its manifestations. In thinking of reality as a substrate which can enter many states we have already left the domain of the one-tiered.

It is of course essential if we are to reach Hegel’s ultimate destination that we leave the realm of the one-tiered, for the concepts of Being in suffering transformation can only go under and give way to others – Etwas disappears and is replaced by another, the quantum changes ceaselessly into another. It is only with the two-tiered concepts of Essence that we can allow for the maintenance of identity through change which is essential to Hegel’s ontology. The categories of Essence are not single concepts, but essentially related couples, (EL, § 111, Addition) appearance and reality, thing and properties, etc. And even though one term may be defined as the more ‘essential’, they are both necessary to characterize reality, and one cannot be posited without the other. Hence in positing one we are led necessarily to posit the other, but without the first being suppressed, as happens in the categories of Being.

But two-tieredness is not all there is to Hegel’s notion of the categories of Essence. There is also this feature of essential relation on which we have just touched. The substance must issue of necessity in the external manifestation, and this in turn refers us necessarily to the substrate. Now we cannot establish this element of necessity from the argument which takes us to substrate from Measure, as we have set it out. But necessity is already established in the category of Infinity. As we move beyond the endless progress of Measure, we rejoin the category which took us beyond the endless progress of determinate Being. There as we saw we were ready to step beyond Being. The centre of gravity shifted from determinate things to the whole system of which they are passing parts or phases. We were thus ready then to step to the categories of Essence, that is, to two-tiered concepts which relate the underlying whole and its passing phase. We put off taking this step in order to take in Quantity, but now that we are ready to go over to Essence, we have a much richer conception of this whole. By showing all qualities as founded on relations of quantity, Measure has given us a language in which to speak of the limits of different qualitites and of the underlying process which carries us from one to another.

But in moving beyond Measure we are still dealing with Infinity, that is, with a self-subsistent system of mutable finite things, the order and successive changes in which occur of necessity, powered by their internal contradiction. So in going beyond Measure we are not just showing that things must inhere in a substrate, but also that they are related in this substrate by negation, i.e., by mutual exclusion, (for each is defined by its other). And moreover, that this negation by the other is internal to each, so that each must necessarily go under and be succeeded by another.

The substrate or whole in which things inhere is thus one whose necessary deployment is powered by contradiction. Its structure and deployment over time is determined by negation or self-exclusion. Hegel speaks of it as a ‘negative totality’ (WL, I, 397). It is a totality because it is not just a collection whose parts are indifferent to each other, but in which each is what it is only in virtue of its necessary relation to the whole. It is negative because

it is simple and infinite negative self-relation, the incompatibility of itself with itself, repulsion of itself from itself, (loc. cit.)9 because this necessary relation, in other words, issues from contradiction.

In EL Hegel simply states the identity of the present category with the Infinity which issued from Dasein (§111). In WL he undertakes a derivation of Essence which forms the last chapter of Measure. It begins with the notion of a mere substrate which is ‘indifferent’ to the different states in which it finds itself, whose change therefore from one state to another must be explained by external factors.

The word Hegel uses here, ‘Indifferenz’, cannot but refer us to the Schelling of the early 1800s, from whom Hegel broke away. Schelling’s Indifferenz was the supposed point of unity of subject and object, which Hegel came to see as untenable precisely because it swallowed up the difference in the unity. And there is a reference in the Remark to Spinoza (WL, I, 396), whose absolute is like an abyss in which differences disappear.

These solutions all suffer from the same disability, that they cannot explain how differences arise. If the changes in its states cannot be explained by the substrate, but only by external factors, then we have not yet arrived at a self-sustaining system. If we do arrive at such a self-subsistent system, then its changes must be explained out of itself, and its different states cannot be thought of as just affecting it externally. The idea of an indifferent substrate is itself a contradiction.

Hence we move from the categories of Being to those of Essence. We see determinate beings as necessarily inhering in a whole or substrate which persists through their coming to be and passing away. But thanks to the category of Infinity we see this substrate not as some self-sufficient reality beyond the finite, but as one which necessarily issues in finite beings, which deploys finite beings according to a necessity which itself is grounded in the very contradiction of the finite. What we heretofore saw as just being there (Dasein) we must now see as ‘posited’ (gesetzt), as deployed by a process of necessity.

The determinations…now no longer belong to themselves, they do not emerge in independence or externality, but belong as moments first to the unity existing an sick, they are not released by this unity but are carried by it as a substrate and receive their content only from it …Instead of beings as in the whole sphere of Being, they are now simply posited reality, with just this determination and meaning, that they are related to their unity and hence each to its other and to negation…

(WL, I, 398)

We saw in Chapter III how important this notion of reality as posited is for Hegel.

We thus enter the realm of two-tiered categories, those of Essence, which Hegel will also call determinations of reflections (‘Reflexionsbestimmungen’). There is quite a rich set of references in this term. First, as we remember, Hegel used ‘reflection’ from quite an early date to designate concepts of division, separation or duality, the concepts of the understanding which are prepotent between the first primitive unity and the final higher one. The determinations of reflection thus fit in the Logic between the immediacy of Being and the higher unity of the Concept.

But the term also refers us to the reflective understanding, which is trying to go beyond a mere grasp of things in their immediacy to understand them as mediated. This brings us to an important feature of Essence, that its categories all make implicit reference to a subject of knowledge. Throughout the Logic, of course, we are dealing with categories by which the world can be known. We are throughout in the domain of transcendental logic. But in Being, we have categories which provide no hint of reference to a subject of knowledge; they characterize reality simply. In Essence, however, the distinctions made between the two terms, e.g., in a pair of related categories such as Appearance and Reality, refer us implicitly to a subject of knowledge; they are made, as it were, from the point of view of such a subject.

The categories of Essence are thus determinations of reflection because they are categories of relation and mediation, and also categories of reflecting understanding. But thirdly, and most fundamentally, they deserve this name because they are both at once; because as grounded in conceptual necessity, the inner structures which mediate external reality are ultimately understandable as structures of thought (and hence as one with our reflective thought). Hence what we will follow in the dialectic of Essence is not the external reflection of the subject trying to understand, but the inner articulations of Essence itself, which however will be expressed in the concepts of reflective understanding. Or rather, we will be following both at once, for as we move to more and more adequate conceptions of the inner articulation of essence we will at the same time be breaking away from inadequate notions of the relation of Essence to the subject of knowledge, as a merely external one. Movement on these two fronts is inseparable, since as we saw above the categories of Essence all refer implicitly to the subject of knowledge and hence posit a certain relation to this subject.

In other words, the reflection of Being back into the underlying reality of Essence can only be for the reflecting subject who is distinguishing appearance and reality; essence and outer manifestation. To follow the contradictions of and transformations in Essence is to follow the contractions of and transformations in the subject’s relation to known reality. The two reflections are thus at first symmetrical, each following its own path. But in the end they become one when we see that the ultimate structure of reality is a structure of thought, and hence that knowing spirit is perfectly at home in, is no longer separated from the inner core of things.

 

 

1 Of course, if we allow ourselves to use the conclusions of the PhG, that knowledge is one with its object, then there is no problem with this derivation. But this would turn the whole Logic from a strict proof to a mere exposition of an already established principle. It would put it on the same level as the dependent dialectics which follow it. In view of the gaps in the PhG as a strict dialectic, it would be fatal to Hegel’s system.

In spite of certain references to the conclusions of the PhG as the starting point of the Logic (e.g., WL, 1, 30, 53), it is doubtful that Hegel actually wanted to trade on these conclusions, as against just seeing them as defining the task of the Logic. But it is possible that he had not fully clarified his thought on this point, which may explain why he permitted himself to pass off these passages of suggestive interpretation as argument.

2 Ch. II. I could not discuss these passages adequately in Ch. IV above. But see my The opening arguments of the Phenomenology’ in Alasdair Maclntyre (Ed.) Hegel, New York, 1972, 151–87.

3 Translation by W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers (slightly amended) in Hegel’s Science of Logic, London, 1929, vol I, 142.

4 Cf. the discussion in Chapter VI, 3.

5 William Wallace translation, in The Logic of Hegel, Oxford, 1874.

6 We can put this point another way: if we think of finite things as just disappearing, then we are back in the category of Nothing. But Nothing in the context of the Logic, where we are dealing with categories, i.e., concepts which bear on some reality, cannot be absolute non-being, whatever that might be. It must rather be thought of as a reality which is not this, not that, in short not any determinate thing. It is thus equivalent to Being, our starting point, and as such it generates Determinate Being once more. Thus Dasein cannot disappear. Cf. WL, I, 118–19, where Hegel alludes to the parallel between the dialectic of Nothing and that of the finite.

7 Cf. dissatisfaction on this point expressed by Jean Wahl: Commentaires de la Logique de Hegel. ‘Les Cours de Sorbonne’ Paris n.d., p. 95.

8 Johnston and Struthers translation I 240.

9 Amended Johnston and Struthers translation I 403. 255