## CHAPTER XI
## Essence
### I: FROM REFLECTION TO GROUND
Essence is the domain in which we see things not just by themselves, ‘immediately’, but as founded on an underlying basis. This is the realm of mediacy, for the notion of essence is inescapably mediate in Hegel’s sense, that is, we can only get to it via another: we come to Essence by reflecting on Being, seeing that it does not suffice to itself, and hence referring back beyond it to what underlies it. Essence thus always refers us to a starting point, to Being which is negated (as self-subsistent). This, says Hegel, is what is expressed in the rather odd etymology of the German word for Essence, ‘wesen’, which is reminiscent of the past participle of the verb ‘to be’, ‘gewesen’: ‘Essence is Being which has passed away, but passed away non-temporally’ (Das Wesen ist das vergangene, aber zeitlos vergangene Sein, WL, II, 3).1

It is this movement back which also gives foundation in part to the image of reflection which plays such a large part in this book. But Hegel first wants to make clear the nature of the Essence he will discuss. It cannot be understood simply by the one-way movement mentioned in the above paragraph, where we start from Being and realizing its inadequacy move to the underlying substrate. This is a movement of ‘reflection’ in one sense, the external reflection of the subject of knowledge who postulates some inner reality to make sense of what he sees. We must also understand this external observable reality as emanating from Essence. The one-sided view which takes into account only the movement to Essence from external object is an account which takes the observed properties of this external reality as simply given. Reflection is external, subjective, because it works on a datum which must just be accepted, which cannot be seen in any way as determined by thought; and hence this reflection, not discovering any necessity in what it observes, must just postulate an underlying reality which it cannot observe.

But as we know already, this is not Hegel’s notion of reality. On the contrary, what exists is not to be seen as simply there, as merely contingent, but rather as the manifestation of a thoroughgoing systematic web of necessary relations. Just as the basic theme of Being was the breaking out of Determinate Being into its other, its necessary self-transcendence and hence demise, which was always shown to be ultimately a return to self; so the basic theme of Essence is going to be the progressively more clear and articulated revelation of necessary connections in the phenomena, until finally these are seen as nothing but the adequate manifestation of thought or inner necessity, and we will have arrived at the concept. This is why in this book the focus of application of the categories will shift (without Hegel taking the trouble to announce it) from the particular thing which it was in Being and can still be seen as in the first parts of Essence to the system of interconnected things, ultimately to the whole system of reality as a totality, of which we had a foretaste in Infinity. For it is finally only the whole which reveals self-sufficient necessity.

Hence Hegel sees Essence not just as that which one gets to from the external observable which is shown to be non-self-subsisting. It is also the underlying necessity which makes the observed what it is. So it must be understood not just in a movement of reflection from the external which is seen as given, and hence presupposed, to a posited substrate; but also in a movement from the underlying necessity which can thus be thought of as ‘positing’ the external observable. Moreover the underlying necessity ‘posits’ (setzt) this observed as something external, hence in a play on words in German we can see this positing as ‘voraussetzen’ which is the German word for ‘presuppose’: the presupposition of external reality in the first movement is the positing which we grasp in the second. This expresses the unity of the two movements, for the inner reality which the external is founded on is nothing but the necessity which posits it. As grasped intellectually, the dependence of external reality on the essential underlying substrate just is the fact that this external reality is posited by the substrate; whereas the real ‘return’ of the external reality, its demise, whose necessity is grasped in our conceptual understanding, is one with the positing of the next term in the necessary sequence.

In the light of this double movement, ‘reflection ‘is to be understood not only as external reflection, that which follows the first movement, but also as an internal, objective reflection, a self-unfolding into external reality, which external reality nevertheless remains identical with Essence. Or in other words, our external reflection is not just dealing with something given, and positing something behind it, rather it is following the real underlying necessity, and hence is no longer a simple external reflection.

Now Hegel thinks himself justified in starting the Book on Essence with this conception of Essence as defined by these two related movements. He does this because as we saw the derivation of Essence is from the demise of Being, a demise which is the necessary positing of another particular being; hence the notions of necessity and positing are there from the start. Indeed, they have been with us in a sense since the category of Infinity, which showed determinate beings to be linked in a process in which they came to be and passed away of necessity. Thus what the book of Essence is about is not the derivation of this inner necessity but the development of richer and richer concepts of it until we come to the full adequacy of external manifestation to inner necessity which will allow us to go over into the Concept.

In the EL, therefore, Hegel starts right off with Essence as Ground, and this is the first triad of the book. In the WL version, however, which is earlier, Hegel spells out the duality of the movement further, without however really deriving it, since he draws throughout on what he has already shown. This preliminary takes up the first chapter of the triad, Show (Schein).

In this first chapter of WL, Hegel makes the basic point of the two-directionality of Essence in two ways. First in a discussion of the idea of external reality as simple Show, that is, as something simply inessential, as a curtain of the unreal which has to be got behind in order to reach the really self-subsistent reality (whether or not we believe that this reality can be observed or reached – we may believe with Kant that the thing in itself is unknowable). This view cannot be maintained once we see that this external observed is not just given, but emanates from Essence, it is not just a barrier, a curtain before reality, but what is necessarily posited by reality, hence it is not separate from but integral to Essence itself. This shows that external reality is not mere Show, but the word Hegel uses here, ‘Schein’, enables him to maintain the same term, for this word is reminiscent of reflection; so he can speak of Essence as a ‘Scheinen in ihm selbst’ (reflection into itself).

The second way in which he makes the two-directional point is in a discussion of reflection, where his point is that the type of reflection which is central to Essence is a synthesis of outer and ‘positing’ reflection. There are references in this discussion to Kant’s distinction between reflective and determining judgement. To mark the essential nature of reflection Hegel calls the category which issues from this dialectic ‘determining reflection’.

With this basis, the dialectic of Essence begins, immediately in EL and after the introductory chapter in WL, to develop the vision of the systematic necessary connection of things.

Identity and Difference
We start first with the most elementary inadequate notions of reflective understanding, in which the persistence of posited being is thought of under the category of Identity and the connected ones of Difference, and non-contradiction. Hegel is here going to set aside the false reifications of the understanding which cannot accept that contradiction is inherent in reality and which thus shows that ‘customary tenderness for things’ (WL, II, 40) which is anxious not to attribute contradiction to them but rather to the understanding. For the understanding informed by this spirit, it seems the most elementary truth of logic that everything is identical with itself, and different from everything else: the ‘Everything is what it is and not another thing’ of Bishop Butler.

But for Hegel things cannot be so simple. True, everything is identical with itself, but it is also so that it is different from itself. The subject of identity, what remains identical through change, is now no longer the simple quality but the underlying essence. But Essence we have understood as the inner necessity which first posits one property, then cancels it in favour of another, and then still another, and so on. Hence, in Hegelian terms, the underlying identity is the difference, the self-differentiation, that which deploys the different properties in their necessary relation to each other. The nature of Essence is to manifest itself in these properties as necessarily related. It is the ‘repulsion’ (Abstoßen) of itself from itself, which at the same time is the reflection back into itself. Hence the identity of a thing with itself – so long as we are not talking about an entity which is defined in terms of a single property, but rather about something which can bear many properties2 – properly understood bears on the underlying substrate which not only can undergo change, but is the necessary source of change itself. This identity thus has difference as an essential moment, and difference as reflected back into itself (through the necessary relation of the two terms) is also one with identity.

On this basis, Hegel moves in this section from the categories of Identity and Difference, through that of Diversity to the category of Opposition. There is not space to go into the detail of the derivation here, which in any case draws on the arguments deployed in the logic of Being. The upshot of this dialectic is that a characterization of things as merely diverse is shown to pass over into a characterization in which things are in essential, or polar opposition to each other. In polar opposition, each term is such that its interaction with another opposed entity is constitutive of its own reality. This is the case, for instance, with positive and negative electricity, or the north and south poles of a magnet. In addition to these examples, Hegel also mentions: light and darkness, virtue and vice, truth and error (WL, Remark 1 to the section on Contradiction, II, 55–6); organic and inorganic nature, and nature and spirit (EL, Addition 1 of § 119).

But it is not Hegel’s intention to claim that the notion of diversity is without application. Of course, there is a diversity of things in the world. What he does have to claim, however, is that seeing things in the world as simply diverse, involving as it does seeing them as being merely contingently related to each other, is a superficial view. Understood at a more fundamental level, each thing is what it is only in a relation of contrastive and interactive opposition with another, which is thus ‘its other’ (EL, § 119).

Having drawn polar opposition from diversity, Hegel then goes on to draw out Contradiction, which of course was in there all along. For what is in opposition is founded on what negates it, and is thus in contradiction with itself and must go under. It is dependent on excluding what is an essential part of itself, its opposite. It cannot stand; both sides ‘thus fall to the Ground’ (gehen hiermit zu Grunde, EL, § 120).

Ground
On this pun we turn the corner to a new dialectical development. The discussion of identity and contradiction led us to look on Essence as the underlying necessity which determines the unfolding of external reality. We thus come to look on Essence as the ground of this reality. Later we shall see that it is of the essence of this inner necessity to manifest itself in what it deploys so that the division between Essence and external reality will be overcome again. But for the moment the division is there and the focus of our interest has shifted to the inner ground.

We have in a sense only now come to the dialectic of Essence, after a lengthy introduction. After approaching Essence through Being, and thus seeing Essence as postulate, we have at last completed the switch whereby we think of Essence as primary, and external reality as simply emanation from it.3 Having taken Essence as our theme in Ground, we can then focus on the real purpose of this book which is to show that the underlying reality is nothing but self-manifesting thought as necessity.

The derivation of the category of contradiction gives the occasion for a couple of Remarks. One contains a blast against the principle of the excluded middle, which again seems utterly foolish taken on its own, but makes sense as an aside to the ontological views developed in the central text. The other Remark (no. 3, WL, II, 58–62) expresses a central idea of Hegel’s philosophy, the necessity of contradiction as the source of all life and movement. A basic prejudice of logic and common sense is

that contradiction is not as essential and inherent a determination as identity; but indeed, if it were a question of rank and the two determinations were to be held separate, we would have to take contradiction as the deeper and more essential. For as opposed to it identity is only the determination of the simple immediate, of dead Being; while contradiction is the root of all movement and life; only insofar as it has a contradiction in itself does anything move, or have impulse and activity.

(WL, II, 58)

Hence all is in contradiction, and this sends it to ground, the pun whereby Hegel refers both to the demise of all finite things, and their necessary reference to an underlying ground, a necessity which deploys them. For contradiction means not just demise but necessary development. Contradiction and necessity are closely linked. The whole point of this section can be seen as a rising above mere contingency to the point where the search for necessary relations can start with the dialectic of Ground. This is the properly philosophical task: ‘The goal of philosophy is...to banish indifference and apprehend the necessity of things, so that the other will appear as standing over against its other’ (EL, § 119, Addition 1).

With the category of Ground we come to look on reality not just as being there, but as grounded. Everything that exists has a reason, is the principle which underlies the concepts of this category: and Hegel quotes here the principle of sufficient reason of Leibniz. To accept this principle is to see that whatever is ‘must be seen not as an immediate existent but as something posited’ (WL, II, 65). So with this category we have really passed beyond the sphere of Being: we now see everything as emanating from its ground. Hegel adds here, on mentioning the name of Leibniz, that this philosopher was quite right not to seek for sufficient reasons in mere mechanical, efficient causes, but rather in final causes.

And this, of course, expresses Hegel’s goal as well; as we have seen in the above paragraphs and all along, the aim is to bring us to a vision of reality as the manifestation of necessity. It was the necessary links between opposites which brought us into the category of Ground, and it is the same necessary interconnectedness between elements of a system which will emerge from it. Hegel is here, once more, immersing himself in a certain range of generally accepted concepts, in order to show how they feed into his own ontological vision, and in the process enrich further our idea of this vision. In a sense, therefore, we will emerge from the discussion on Ground with the same basic notion of reality as necessary interconnection with which we entered, having added another range of ordinary concepts to those which have been shown to be properly understood only in the light of Hegel’s ontology. But in another sense, this vision is further developed in this section; for it becomes clearer that we are dealing with a system of related beings, a totality of external being which is systematically and necessarily related.

This comes out in the argument.4 Starting out simply with the concept of ground or sufficient reason, we explore the contradiction implicit in its application. The contradiction consists in this: in order to have a really sufficient reason for something, we have to outline conditions which are identical with or which entail the event or thing to be explained. But a reason which amounts to the same thing as what is explained is not satisfactory as an explanation: it fails to be informative. Hegel takes to task in his comments here empty explanations, like that which attributes the effects of opium to a virtus dormitiva, although some of the examples he picks hardly seem to fit this particular criticism. To be informative an explanation must give us a ground which is not identical with what we are explaining. But in doing so, we lose the sufficiency of the reason; for ground and grounded are now no longer the same, and hence they are only contingendy linked. It cannot be sufficient to give A, the contingent cause of B, as its ground; for A, by itself, is not sufficient for B, but only A in combination with the causal connection by which it brings about B.

The dilemma, or contradiction, in which we find ourselves with the notion of ground is thus this: to the extent that our citing of a ground is informative, it will be distinct from the entity to be explained (Hegel calls this ‘real ground’), but then it will be insufficient; on the other hand, if it is sufficient, it will no longer be distinct from the explicandum, and then it will be empty and uninformative (what Hegel calls ‘formal ground’).

This dilemma does not seem difficult to resolve for contemporary thinkers, in so far as it can be recognized at all. There do seem to be points in common with the notions of explanation current in contemporary philosophy of science: a valid explanation must be one in which the explicandum can be deduced from the explicans; while at the same time, Hume’s dictum of the contingency of the relation between cause and effect must be adhered to. But these two requirements can be met by the standard form of explanation according to many writers in the philosophy of science, where we explain B by the combination of two premisses: that A occurred, and that A is followed by B. This satisfies both the condition of sufficiency, which here is interpreted as requiring a deductive relation between explicans and explicandum, and the condition of informativeness, that the cause and effect be contingently related. The latter is satisfied in so far as the major premiss, the general law, is contingent.

But this modern interpretation of the requirements of sufficiency and informativeness is not Hegel’s. If this were not already evident, it would certainly become so in the discussion of the relation of condition to ground, which is somewhat similar to that between particular condition and general correlation in the canonical explanation, and which provides the transition out of Ground. For the canonical explanation of today’s philosophy of science is still radically incomplete in Hegel’s eyes; and this precisely because it is contingent. Because ‘A leads to B, ‘is contingent, it calls for a further explanation: why does A lead to B?; And a canonical explanation of this will call for a further such explanation and so on ad infinitum; And a similar infinite regress opens out behind the condition A, once we ask why it occurred. (Cf. WL, II, 96.)

Hegel is looking, as we have seen before, for an explanation which is complete in a sense that is thought impossible by contemporary philosophy of science, a deduction of necessity which is not grounded on what are ultimately contingent premisses, but which is necessary through and through. We have seen the idea of this as that of a circle of necessary connections, in which the starting point, which at the beginning is just posited and hence unsupported, ends up being derived. This is obviously the vision of reality as thoroughgoing necessity which is being forged out of the dialectical transitions of the Logic, and it is this which gives Hegel his criterion of sufficiency. This, of course, seriously weakens his argument from the point of view of a contemporary reader, for it amounts to assuming a crucial aspect of what he wants to prove, but it seems difficult to deny that Hegel is proceeding on this criterion here, as he does in similar passages elsewhere.5

But while it might appear gratuitous to assume a criterion of this kind if we raised the issue of scientific explanation out of the blue, as it were, there is some justification for it in the context of Hegel’s argument in the Logic. For we have supposedly already established that reality forms a system of changes which are powered by necessity. But if changes come about by necessity, a fully adequate account of their grounds must show the necessary connection. This is what justifies us in demanding something more than the deducibility from general law of the canonical theory of explanation.

And once we grant the legitimacy of this demand we can appreciate the dilemma; if complete explanation must be complete in the sense that one can no longer ask why?, and if this, as is evident, is incompatible with our relying on unexplained contingent premisses, then it does appear that the two criteria, of sufficiency and informativeness, are in a head-on clash.

And in fact the only way of solving this dilemma, if it can be solved at all, is by some solution along the lines that Hegel proposes: contingent relations can be observed to hold between particular things and events whereby some can be picked out as grounds for others, but the whole system of which these form part is structured by necessary relations.

Contingency can be thought to exist in the interstices of necessity in one of two ways: either we think of the contingency as just apparent, the result of our looking at just these two things or events, whereas when we see the whole we can see why they must be related that way – analogously the correlation of two features in an organism may be just brute fact as long as we concentrate on these two features alone, but may receive a fuller explanation (albeit, of course, still not one of thoroughgoing necessity) if we look at them in the context of the whole organism. Thus we would claim that the fact that animate beings are mortal might appear as just a contingent correlation if we focus simply on these beings, but can be seen to flow of necessity from the nature of things once we grasp the correct ontological vision.

Or else, contingency might be thought to be real, but contained: the general furniture of the world, that there is matter, body, gravity; that there are different kinds of animate being, that men exist, that human history takes the general lines that it does; all this is so of necessity. But particular facts: that there are islands half way across the Atlantic, or that the value of G is 32 feet per second per second; these matters of detail could be different.

Hegel seems to have held to the existence of both kinds of intersticial contingency. The two can be brought together under the general formula which would consider the basic structures of the universe, what is described by categorial concepts and their connections, to be necessary; while descriptions couched in other, less general terms either relate features of this structure in ways which obscure their necessity, or apply to detailed aspects of reality which can vary relative to the structure.

If this second kind of contingency seems difficult to reconcile with the thesis of thoroughgoing necessity, the answer is that the structure of things is such that all the categories of the Logic have application. Things can be described as Determinate Being, as Quantity, and so on. The dialectical passing beyond these categories does not show them to be empty, but to be inadequate, to call for supplementation by others. And hence they apply. Reality is also made up of determinate beings, quanta, and so on. As such reality also has its contingent aspect. This can be reconciled with thoroughgoing systematic necessity by the thesis that such contingent facts and relations hold within a certain framework which itself is necessary. And it must be so reconciled once we see that all the categories must hold. For then contingency, inseparable from determinate being, quantity, and so on, exists of necessity.

Now in relation to the solution of the dilemma of sufficient reasons, these two notions of intersticial contingency would involve either the view that the contingent relation of particular ground to particular grounded can be transposed into a necessary one by supplementing it with an understanding of the system of which it is a part, or else the view that the grounds of particular details must remain contingently related to them, but that the realities concerned characterized in their essential properties are grounded in necessity. In either case, we move from a superficial contingency to an underlying necessity as we move from detail to system.

And this is Hegel’s solution to the dilemma of Ground. There are particular relations of ground to thing grounded which taken on their own are contingent, but underlying them is the systematic necessity of the whole. As long as we remain thus at the level of the particular details, we are necessarily dealing with insufficient grounds. The principle of sufficient reason, however, is satisfied in the fact that they take their place in the whole by necessity. Hence the only sufficient explanation which is based on thoroughgoing necessity is one which refers us to the whole system. And in this case explicandum and explicans are no longer identified on their own as particular elements, but are related to the whole. The explanation of these elements is by the whole of which they are parts. So that the explicandum ceases to be distinct from the explicans, rather it is incorporated in it.

Thus the mortality of men may seem at first contingent to us. But when we see it as grounded in the contradiction of spirit, which must be embodied in finitude, and yet must go beyond it, we see its necessity. But at the same time the necessary process of spirit by which we explain mortality is not distinct from it. Mortality, as well as birth, is one of its phases.6

But nevertheless this explanation has none of the vices of virtus dormitiva explanations for to grasp this global necessity is to grasp a system of differentiated elements which are related to each other. It is thus richly informative, and includes a number of particular relationships, which taken on their own appear as contingent. In this way, the necessity required by the principle of sufficient reason is combined with the real differentiation of terms in the relationship of ground to grounded without which explanations are uninformative.

The notion of reality as a total system of necessarily related elements gives another aspect to the dialectic of identity and difference above. As a whole (ein Ganzes) the system of related elements is one, it reflects identity, and the explanation of the whole by the whole is one in which ground and grounded are identical. But as a system of different elements, and moreover elements which are separately existing objects, the system has otherness, difference; ground and grounded are different entities which are related in this way. Reality is necessarily both. Without the necessary link which is identity, what exists would have no ground, it would be without foundation, hence would not exist. But without difference, real differentiation of elements, there could also be no existence, because pure being as we saw is equivalent to pure nothing. And difference requires real separately existing objects, external reality, objects which exist apart from each other, hence in time and space. Without difference, there would be no real independent existence (Bestehen).

We can look at this whole also through the concepts of mediation and immediacy. Unlike the sphere of Being, the elements of this system are all mediated; each is posited, brought about, grounded by the others. Mediation is thus universal. But the system as a whole is not mediated, it is the locus of all mediation, but it depends on nothing outside itself. It is thus immediate. But its immediacy is not like that of the first categories of Being. This is an immediacy which is founded on mediation, which has overcome mediation in the sense that it closes the circle of a set of mediations back on itself. It is an immediacy of a self-subsistent system, which suffices to itself. Thus Hegel speaks of it as ‘grundlos’ (WL, II, 99–100). It is ‘the restoration of immediacy or Being, but of Being in so far as it is mediated through the suppression [Aufhebung] of mediation’ (EL, § 122).

This says Hegel is the category of Existence. The use of this latin-derived word is designed to trade on the etymological reference to externalization. For what Hegel wants to emphasize in this solution to the dilemma of Ground is that this category is not to be seen as designating something inner and hidden which lies behind reality. When we think of reality as grounded, we think of it as reposing on something else; and this may lead us and has often led men to think of that on which they are grounded as some hidden inner basis. This is the more likely, when they reflect that particular external events and things which are candidates for ground are insufficient. Hegel’s point is that what is lacking in the particular conditions of an event to make the sufficient reason is not something behind this event and hidden, but the necessity of the whole system of which it is a part. Or to put the point differently, the inner basis of things is not some entity behind, but a necessity which finds its full and only expression in external reality, precisely in the necessary connections of this reality as system. The full understanding of Ground shows us that there is nothing behind external reality. But this is not to say that we are at the starting point where we confront simple being. By the fact that we have grasped the pervasiveness of necessity we now see what is out there as posited, as brought about by this necessity. Hence we see things not only as external reality but as coming out into external reality, as unfolding, coming to be in their externality in conformity to the inner formula of necessity. And this is what gives force to the notion of Existence.

Hence with the transition to existence, Hegel has taken the crucial step in the task of this book, which is to make us see Essence, as that which underlies external reality, not as something hidden behind, but as fully manifest necessity. It will remain in the following sections of this book to enrich this notion of systematic necessity, but the problem here has been posed. In this sense, the dialectic of Ground represents an advance. True, this notion of the necessary relation of elements was present before, and was essential to earlier arguments of this book, and especially to the derivation of Ground. But in this section there has emerged more clearly the idea of a whole of systematically related elements, and the accompanying idea of an inner basis whose nature it is to be fully manifest externally. These are crucial themes which need and will get a lot of further development, but which are here adumbrated. Hence Existence

is the indefinite multitude of existents as reflected into themselves, which at the same time equally throw light upon one other – which, in short, are relative, and form a world of reciprocal dependence, and of infinite interconnection between grounds and consequents.7

(EL, § 123).

But this mass of existents, though related to each other in a whole, is not yet the full manifestation of necessity which alone is an adequate ground of things. This is what now must be derived.

In this motley play of the world, if we may so call the sum of what exists, there is nowhere a firm footing to be found; everything bears an aspect of relativity, conditioned by and conditioning something else. The reflective understanding makes it its business to elicit and trace these connections running out in every direction; but the question of a final end remains unanswered through all this. Thus the demand of conceiving reason takes it beyond this position of mere relativity with the further evolution of the Logical Idea.

(loc. cit.)8

In the section on Ground in WL Hegel takes up the discussion of the distinctions between form and essence, form and matter, form and content. The latter two are discussed at a somewhat later point in EL. But this is not a substantial revision, for Hegel’s task here as usual is to show how his basic idea emerges out of an examination of these distinctions, and in the process to break down the fixed oppositions of the understanding. There is as such no single point at which these distinctions must be taken up.

Hegel will go on to develop the idea of manifest necessity through the category of Appearance. This is understood, like Existence, as a verbal noun rather than a simply adjectival one: appearance is that which appears, that which steps out into exteriority. It will not therefore be contrasted with a reality which is more essential and which is hidden.

Thing
But before going on to this discussion there is one more important category of common sense and traditional philosophy which Hegel has to have it out with, that is the Thing. We are speaking here of the thing which possesses properties, which is the bearer of properties. We had not come to it in the sphere of Being, for there we had Quality which was one with Being: the Something ceased to be once the quality changed. So that the relation of ‘having’ could not be ascribed there.9 But here we have come to the idea of a totality of interconnected elements, a multiplicity of properties bound together, hence of a unity which has properties, but can survive alteration in them, hence to the relation of having.

Not the notion of the thing which has ‘properties’ (which word also is resonant of the having relation, and in German as well as English with the word ‘Eigenschaft’) is a conception of totality which Hegel must oppose. And this for two reasons.

The first can be put in three related ways: first, Hegel’s idea of totality as we have seen is of elements which are inseparably related and yet in opposition, but the ordinary notion of thing with properties is rather that of the peaceful coexistence of different properties in the thing. Secondly, Hegel sees contradiction, that is the opposition within the inseparable, as necessary as the source of movement, becoming, while the notion of thing with properties is rather that of stable co-existence. Thirdly, the fact that the different elements of a totality are related by contradiction which is in turn the ground of necessary relations is what warrants our seeing the world of real existent things as grounded in thought, as ultimately emanating from subjectivity, whereas the model of thing with properties offers us a view of external, material reality as reposing ultimately on itself, as not requiring appeal to something other than itself to be consistent and self-subsistent.

The model of thing with properties is thus an alternative model to Hegel’s whether it is applied to particular things or extended to the whole universe, which in this sense can be seen as a single thing with different aspects. It is one in which external, material existence suffices to itself, since all its different aspects can be seen to fit together coherentiy in a unity which is simply external material reality writ large. Whereas for Hegel the truth that this was not so, that external material reality emanates from thought and hence spirit, that it cannot be understood as self-supporting but really is grounded on thought, this appears in, indeed is the fact that it is not self-consistent, that it is a relation of aspects which at once require and oppose each other. This is what makes it contradictory, and hence destined to go under, and undergo perpetual change. And this is why reality can only coherentiy be grasped as a necessary chain, or circle of beings through which alone this contradiction can find resolution. In other words, the problem posed by the contradictoriness of external reality can only be solved by seeing this reality as part of a larger whole, as the manifestation of an inner necessity, hence as not self-dependent, but dependent on thought, which Hegel identifies with this inner necessity, and on what later in the Logic will be seen as spirit.

In a sense, therefore, the issue about the coherence of our conception of the thing with properties, is the issue about idealism. But only in a very special sense: for there are lots of non-materialists, like Kant, who are attacked in this dialectical dissolution of the thing. And moreover, Marxism on the other side is a doctrine which while it claims to be anti-idealist builds on this Hegelian insight of universal contradiction and hence movement. The conception of the thing with properties is the quintessence of stable, identical thought, which cannot grasp things in their essential movement, and which for Marxists is at its height in the bourgeois era, the era of maximum ‘reification’. Perhaps there is after all more than a bad pun in the fact that this category makes such use of the relation of having and the notion of’ property’.10 But the idealism that is being defended here is clearly not a dualistic kind, nor one that would resolve dualism by affirming spirit alone, but rather the absolute idealism of Hegel. It is clear that this form of idealism cannot consort with the conception of totality which is implied in the thing with properties, as a stable, self-subsistent ensemble.

The second reason why Hegel must take up the cudgels against this notion is that it tends to solve the problem of the unity of the object over against its multiple properties, by seeing this unity as a substrate, moreover as one which is unknowable. It seems a plausible argument of traditional philosophy that whatever we observe, we are always observing properties. The unity which ties them all together is a je-ne-sais-quoi underlying them, not itself observable. This notion of an unknown substrate develops into the Ding-an-sich in Kant’s philosophy, and it is in this form that Hegel takes it up in this section. But what all other forms of substrate concept share with Kant’s, and which Hegel objects to, is the aspect of unknowability, which puts some of reality effectively beyond the reach of spirit, and hence accepts an unabsorbed dualism. This is, of course, against the most basic motivations of Hegel’s entire philosophical endeavour. Hence his (as one might have thought) rather excessive barb against Kant (WL, II, 111–12) that this notion of the distinction between thing in itself and phenomenon contradicts the consciousness of freedom.

But Hegel seems to think that this recourse to the unknowable substrate comes naturally out of the conception of the thing, as an attempt to solve the problem of its coherent unity. For Hegel there is such a problem as we saw above in the discussions of the second chapter of the PhG, and indeed, an insoluble one. And this is just the essence of his case, for in Hegel’s view such an insoluble contradiction holds precisely between the elements which are united in a totality, as we have just seen. Hegel’s claim that there is an unavoidable contradiction in the notion of a thing with properties is no stronger than his thesis that finite things in general are contradictory. We cannot follow out his argument here, which covers some of the same ground as the second chapter of the PhG, and relies in part on certain current notions of the time, e.g., a physics founded on the notion of various kinds of ‘matters’.

Where Hegel does uncover contradiction is in the various ways in which the unity of the thing has been conceived in the modern epistemological tradition which starts with Descartes and continues through the empiricists, and from which Kant only partly freed himself. In this too contemplative tradition in which the subject was not seen as being at grips with the world, but just as being affected by it, the unity of the thing was always in danger of flying apart into a number of separate data of sense. So that it was either conceived as an unknown substrate, or as something constructed; but never as really experienced.

Hegel’s basic démarche in both versions is to trade on the incoherencies of the notions of the thing derived from this modern epistemology, very much as in the PhG. The Ding-an-sich is first considered: it is the unity which is reflected into a multiplicity of properties in its relation to other things, principally the knowing mind. But its properties cannot be separated from the thing in itself, for without properties it is indistinguishable from all the others. We might therefore say that there is only one thing in itself, but then it has nothing with which to interact, and it was this interaction with others, which gave rise to the multiplicity of properties. If there is only one thing-in-itself, it must of itself go over into the multiplicity of external properties. If we retain the notion of many, however, we reach the same result, for the many can only be distinguished by some difference of properties, hence the properties of each cannot be separated from it, it cannot be seen as simple identity.

Thus the notion of a Ding-an-sich as unknowable, simple substrate, separate from the visible properties which only arise in its interaction with others, cannot be sustained. The properties are essential to the thing, whether we look at it as one or many. And so Hegel goes over to consider the view which makes the thing nothing but these properties, which sees it as the simple coexistence of the properties. Here is where the theories of reality as made up of ‘matters’ naturally figure in Hegel’s discussion.

But the particular thing cannot just be reduced to a mere coexistence of properties. For each of these properties exists in many things. In order to single out a particular instance of any property, we have to invoke another property dimension. If we want to single out this blue we have to distinguish it from others, identify it by its shape, or its position in time and space, or its relation to other things. But to do this is to introduce the notion of the multipropertied particular, for we have something now which is blue and round, or blue and to the left of the grey, or blue and occurring today, or something of the sort.

The particular is necessarily multipropertied, and this multipropertied particular is essential to our experience. For otherwise the only entities which could be distinguished would be properties themselves, these would become in effect the things of our universe. But properties cannot be distinguished without occurring in contrast, and to occur in contrast means to occur in particulars; either as blue and green occur in different patches, or as shape and colour can be distinguished because they are contrasting dimensions of particulars. A world of qualities without particulars is inconceivable because there would be no communication between these qualities, they would not exist in the same world, hence could not be contrasted, hence would not be qualities, which requires determination through the negation of others.

Hegel uses this necessity of contrast to bring the argument back to the initial and he thinks insoluble problem, how to think together the thing and its properties without incoherence. The ‘this’ cannot be done away with, but nor can the multiplicity of properties. The thing is thus in contradiction with itself.

‘The thing is nothing else but this contradiction itself; that is why it is Appearance’ (WL, II, 121). Hence Hegel has vindicated his basic idea of the contradictory nature of a reality which is a totality of elements which require each other, and yet are in opposition to each other: here properties which must exist together (for the thing cannot be done away with) and yet which cannot cohere. He has vindicated it against the static, reified view of the thing as self-subsistent ensemble. And hence he has shown that the material thing is essentially that which breaks up (sich auflöst), and goes over into appearance. By this he means that the thing is not self-subsistent entity, that it is not only mortal, but that its existence is the unfolding of a totality which can only exist as the manifestation of inner necessity, not as an ensemble of elements on its own. That is, the elements only fit together, because they are opposed and contradictory, as the unfolding moments of a totality which is ruled by necessity. Hence the break-up of the thing is not just its impending, necessary demise, but also reflects its non-self-sufficiency, the fact that it is the manifestation of something else, inner necessity. And this means that it is not just there, but is deployed. It is made to appear. This is what underlies the transition to Appearance.11

### II: APPEARANCE
In Appearance the principal development is of the idea of relation. The force of ‘appearance’ here is that we see things as appearing, as posited, as coming to manifestation through necessity, rather than as just being there ‘immediately’. To see things as appearance is to see them not as just reposing on themselves (auf sich selbst beruhend), but as moments of a larger whole (EL, § 131, Addition), and hence to see them as in necessary relation to others.

Reality seen as appearance is something higher than immediate, independent beings. This comes as a surprise to ordinary consciousness, but that is because it understands appearance as a screen before reality. In fact there is nothing behind. To say that Essence is appearance is to say that it must appear, ‘that essence does not remain behind or beyond appearance’, but goes out into existence. (EL, § 131 Addition.)

Hegel’s use of ‘appearance’ thus expresses the exact opposite of Kant’s. Instead of pointing by contrast to the essential hiddenness of the transcendent real, it rather expresses the essential manifest-ness of all reality. Seeing reality as Appearance for Hegel is seeing it as the appearing of inner necessity, as deployed in order to manifest a necessity which is determined by nature to become fully manifest. Thus the point of this category is the central Hegelian one that the real is not ‘just there’ but is posited, deployed in fulfilment of a rational formula. Thus what is afoot here is the development of a notion of Essence as a necessity which must come to full manifestation in external reality. This will come triumphantly to light in the third section of Essence, which Hegel calls Reality (Wirklichkeit). Here we will be laying the groundwork for it through the idea of necessary relatedness.

The relatedness discussed is between two kinds of terms: first, relatedness between the different elements of the totality, which must ultimately come to exhibit necessity; and second the relation between the underlying reality and the external totality of elements. These two forms of relation develop together, in that the less necessity appears in the totality of external reality, the more we must distinguish this external reality from the underlying essence, in which all things are in unity. In other words, since we are ultimately dealing with a necessarily related totality, the non-manifestness of this necessity in external reality must go along with a distinction between this external reality and the underlying essence. Conversely, the greater manifestation of the necessity will go along with a fuller identification of reality and essence. These two developments will occur together in this section.

With Appearance, we start again from a putative distinction between essence and manifestation, and overcome it. But unlike in earlier phases, we are now dealing with reality as totality, and as related totality, and as a totality which is not simply stable coexistence of elements, but undergoes change, development, has inner opposition. So the inner essence is not any longer a thing-like reality, as with the thing in itself. It is rather an inner formula of relatedness. But as inner it is still separate from external reality, and hence is an inner formula, not yet the manifestation of essence in the system of reality, which we shall see in Wirklichkeit. We have to overcome this opposition of inner and outer, which will in fact be the last opposition of the section, but everything else builds up to it.

In order to set the stage for the consideration of necessary relatedness, Hegel takes us through a preceding dialectic which is different in WL and EL. In the latter, he leads up to it by a discussion of content and form, the substance of which cornes earlier in WL. In this earlier work, the lead-up is through a discussion of laws.

In both cases, the relevance of the lead-up is the same: appearance for traditional philosophy is in contrast with something more fundamental. But at this stage, as we have seen, this more fundamental cannot be thing-like, but must be the underlying relatedness. What we are dealing with at this stage therefore is a pair of alternative ways of conceiving this relatedness as beyond or underlying the external reality. One such way is to contrast the manifold of heterogeneous external reality, with the inner relatedness of laws which underlie it. We see the realm of laws as ‘the tranquil image of the existing or appearing world’ (WL, II, 127). Another way is to contrast the content of intuition with the form in which the heterogeneous manifold of intuition is seen as related. The former is the way of the WL, the latter of the EL.

In both cases, the task is to show that this distinction cannot stand up: that form and content are inseparable, that each turns into the other, or that the inner identity or relatedness of the law cannot be separated from the real external manifold. In the first case, the Hegelian reading of these terms ‘form ‘and ‘content’ is enough to ensure the transition. In WL reference is made to another Hegelian theme, the inadequacy of contingent laws.

For considered as a ‘calm reflection ‘of the world of phenomena, laws do not have the same content. The real events which happen in conformity with law have a host of other particular characteristics which the law does not explain. There is thus a gap between the two. In addition, in the law itself, there is only a contingent relation between the two terms: for instance, in the law of falling bodies, there is no necessity linking distances to the square of the times. But, on Hegel’s view, the point of the law is to explain, and the explanation is not complete as long as there is any contingency in it, as we saw. Thus speaking of the law of falling bodies:

The law governing this is known empirically, and in so far it is merely immediate; and a proof is still required, that is, a mediation for cognition, that the law not only operates but is necessary. The law as such does not contain this proof and its objective necessity.12

(WL, II, 129)

In both cases, the law is unsatisfactory as a candidate for the underlying reality behind the Appearance; for it neither really underlies everything, nor does it achieve the inner relatedness which it is supposed to. It is both too inner (because not having the full content of the outer) and too outer (because not rising to necessity).

Just as in the PhG (Chapter m) we can note that this kind of necessity is not what we demand of our scientific laws, and it is no objection to the law of falling bodies that it does not achieve this. But Hegel is here frying other fish. For we have already deduced necessary relatedness in the previous phases. Hence law is seen against this background, as a way of conceiving the necessary relatedness underlying the phenomena. As such it fails. Of course, it may be perfectly valid as a tool of empirical science. All we know is that it cannot be the final word and stopping point of our quest for a valid ontology.

What emerges out of this dialectic in WL is the unity of the underlying relatedness expressed in the law and the external reality of which the law is true. And this gives us the idea of a totality of elements which while separate from each other are essentially related. The distinction between essence and externality thus becomes rather one between the elements of this external reality and their relatedness. The dialectic of Relation (Verhältnis) allows Hegel to go through a series of conceptions of this relatedness and show their inadequacy, and at the same time to underscore the unity between elements and relatedness which is also a unity between inner and outer.

The section therefore goes back and forth between dualisms which contrast inner and outer, and dualisms which contrast elements and the necessity binding the elements. At first we have both, with a dualism between the external world of the manifold and the inner law, which is a connection between the elements of the manifold. Now the emphasis shifts to the dualism: elements/necessity, only to end up once more with a pure opposition of inner and outer which cannot but collapse.

Whole and part
The first stage of the opposition elements/connection is the relation of whole and part. Hegel plays a dialectic with this by showing that each requires the other, in the sense that the whole is only whole if in relation to parts, and the parts only parts if in relation to a whole. If the parts are seen on their own, they are no longer parts, but become wholes. This, he says, (WL, II, 143–4) is one way of looking at the Kantian antinomy of endless divisibility: we take the parts, and by looking at them on their own make them into wholes, which in turn must be divided, and so forth endlessly. But we should rather realize that parts are only parts in relation to the whole.

Yet, on the other hand, parts and whole are not identical, each only exists in opposition to the other, and each in order to exist for itself, must as it were reduce the other to satellite status, dependent on itself: the whole must hold the parts as subordinate elements to be self-subsistent, the parts have to break free to be self-subsistent. But then each in achieving success would negate itself: the whole would melt its parts into one, and thus not be a whole (which it only is in contrast), the parts would break free and hence not be parts.

So whole and parts are each as terms related essentially to their other. Each is only itself in relation to another which is its negation. Each refers us to the other. This inner relation of the two takes us beyond a simple conception of the part-whole relation where we think of the whole and the assemblage of parts coexisting peacefully as two ways of looking at the same thing. Looked at either way, we have a contradiction, says Hegel, in which both terms are involved. The idea that there are two optional ways of looking at the same reality really supposes that this reality is stable, and simply admits of two descriptions; whereas the contradictions in it that we see by looking at part and whole show that it is in movement, that it is constantly going over from unity to multiplicity and back again. But this relation of exteriorization is that of force and its manifestation. It is the whole seen dynamically as inner force which produces external reality as its manifestation.

This transition to force reminds us of that in the PhG which also came from an attempt to unify two opposites into a stable view of the object. Hegel’s argument is that if the wholes are really out of subsistent parts, then the whole is just our reading of the ensemble of parts, but then there are no real parts. And similarly, if we think of the whole as real, then the parts are just our abstraction, and then there is no real whole. For there to be real wholes out there which nevertheless have parts, there have to be elements which are bound together by interaction. Interaction itself will come up later in the next section, but the idea of a dynamic reality, in which different external elements are really linked into a unity outside our own subjective grouping is what is at stake here.

This brings us to force and its manifestations, whereby we can see the external manifold as issuing from some underlying force; so that it is not only unquestionably manifold, but unquestionably also bound together in a totality.

But the notion of force is inadequate in its turn to the vision of totality we are looking for. Force, as Hegel reminds us sternly, is inadequate as a way of representing Geist (this is directed, inter alia, against Herder). It proceeds blindly, and not as purpose does, towards a rational end. And it is bound up with this that forces are limited, they have particular contents and particular conditions. Thus we can think of a given force, like magnetism, but this presupposes specific kinds of substrate, like iron (EL, § 136, Addition 1 ). And iron has a host of other properties which are not essentially related to magnetism. Similarly, forces require certain conditions to manifest themselves. Hegel calls this the requirement of another force to ‘solicit’ the first; and we have a dialectic which is again reminscent of Chapter III of the PhG.

Thus to see the world as the manifestation of forces, is to see it as the joint product of many forces, which are complexly related as ‘soliciting’ or triggering each other. Hegel as in the PhG goes through an involved dance with the forces which are solicited and yet soliciting at the same time. The background of this dialectic is a terminology which had some currency at the time. But the basis of the transition is more fundamentally that we have got to a stage where we cannot allow a diverse multiplicity of forces any more than we could allow a diversity of qualities earlier, in the opening phases of Essence. We have reached a point where we are dealing with essentially related totality, and any category which cannot cope with this has to be gone beyond. Hence the relation of force to the ‘soliciting’ force, which is its precondition, is essentially that for Hegel force itself as a thrust towards some external manifestation can be seen as determining in turn its own triggering conditions. Instead of just being the impulse behind a given manifestation it must be seen as that which brings this manifestation out of the conditions which determine it, it is the inner link between conditions and manifestation.

But putting together this idea of totality and the newly arrived at notion of force, we have a new way of looking at the totality, viz., as the manifestation, the external expression, of an inner link. It is this notion of deployment outwards of reality which was present in Existence and Appearance, but which has now a much more adequate expression in a category which incorporates the notion of force. External reality is expression, a manifestation of essential connection.

Inner and outer
This effectively puts an end to the duality posed in terms of elements and their link, for now the elements only exist as expression of the linkage. But it remains to do away with the last possible semblance of duality, between the inner necessity and its manifestation. This would be a pure distinction between inner and outer in that, unlike with the case of law above, there is now absolutely no difference in content between inner and outer, for the latter is nothing but an expression of the former. They have the same content.

But this kind of duality is untenable on Hegel’s terms, and we have now got to the point where he can show us this. As we saw in Chapter III, the conception of reality as manifest necessity makes it such that there is a link of equivalence between the state where reality is purely inner, in the sense of hidden, and reality is purely outer, in the sense of external to itself, not inwardly related by any link of necessity. The more that the essence is hidden (inner), the more reality is purely externally related (outer). This is what Hegel calls the immediate unity of inner and outer. Conversely, the more essential reality is externalized in the sense of expressed, the more the relatedness of reality is developed, and the more inwardness it has. This is the mediated unity. Hegel gives other examples of the immediate unity. A child is one in which humanity is merely inner, undeveloped; and for that reason he has to receive his humanity in training from the outside. This relation of inner and outer is predicated on the Hegelian idea of reality as manifestation of necessity, relatedness.

Hence any attempt to separate inner from outer cannot but make the outer external in the sense of no longer intro-reflected, and hence open a rift between the two. Once there is a rift between the two, we are in the realm of the immediate unity in which one simply goes over impotendy into the other. But if they are really the same, if they have the same content, then there can no longer be any distinction between them.

Hence in this realm where inner is really one with outer, the inner is such that it must express itself. Its nature is to reveal itself (sich offenbaren), to make itself evident. To say that inner and outer are the same is to say that reality is essentially self-manifesting. And this is what Hegel means by Reality (Wirklichkeit), that which is a union of Essence and Appearance, which is external and yet fully manifestation of the essential. Reality is now such that

since its content and its form are completely identical, it is nothing else an und für sich but the fact of its self-externalization [sich äußern]. It is the revelation of its essence, so that this essence simply consists in this, that it is that which reveals itself.

(WL, II, 155)

### III: REALITY
With Wirklichkeit we get to an important category of Hegel’s philosophy. It is external reality which is fully expression of the essence, and external reality which has nothing hidden behind it, because it is full manifestation of what is essential. It is the unity of Being and reflection, Being and Essence. Existence was in a sense already this, as appearance, but this says Hegel was only their immediate unity; for it was mediated out of Ground, and we had yet to show the dialectic of outer reality and inner relatedness. Existence ‘comes from the ground and falls to the ground’ (kommt aus dem Grunde und geht zu Grunde, EL, § 142).13 But Wirklichkeit is the posited unity of Being and Essence, it is the relation which has developed to identity (das mit sich identischgewordene Verhältnis). ‘It is thus exempted from transition [dem Übergehen entnommen] and its externality is its energizing [Energie]. In that energizing it is reflected into itself; its determinate existence [Dasein] is only the manifestation of itself and not of something else’ (loc. cit.).

The Addition to the same § of the EL goes on to excoriate the common sense way of talking of Wirklichkeit as separate from the idea. On the contrary, Wirklichkeit is the unity of inner and outer and is hence the really rational.14

The section on Wirklichkeit develops this idea of manifest necessity, manifested essence, through two main dialectics which are common to both versions: the first is a study of modal terms, of necessity, actuality and possibility. This is destined to vindicate for actuality the status of manifested necessity, and also at the same time to explicate the relation of necessity to contingency. We finally, therefore, come to grips here with the notion of necessity which has been underlying Essence all along. The time has come now to take these modal categories into our system. We must show that they can not be seen as with Kant as touching not reality but just its relation to our faculty of knowledge. Nor can possibility be allowed the last word as with Leibniz for whom this world was only the best of all possible, and was hence in an important sense contingent.

The second dialectic is one which finally goes into the three substantive relations which Kant singled out for a special role in the analogies of experience, substance-accident, cause-effect, and interaction, in order to derive them as having their place in the reality which has been shown to be a totality governed by necessity, and which yet points beyond to subjectivity, and hence to the Concept. The main transition which is afoot in this whole section is that which moves through completed necessity to freedom, and hence the activity of the subject. Real necessity which depends only on itself is the same as freedom, as self-development, which we think of as an attribute of subject. Fully developed necessity is therefore freedom, and since in Hegel’s terminology the fully developed is the true, we can say that the truth of necessity is freedom, as we shall see by and by.

But before both of these dialectics, we have in the WL a first phase concerning the absolute, which is in fact a critique of Spinoza and a situating of Hegel’s position vis-à-vis Spinozan monism.15 Although not essential to the dialectic, this raising of Spinoza is not a departure from the central theme. Spinoza is an important philosopher for Hegel, and this not simply in the sense that all past philosophy was important for one who was the first major thinker to express his position as essentially an Aufhebung of all previous thought. Within this general importance of all the philosophical past, some philosophers stand out: Aristotle, of course; and Kant as the indispensable starting point, the definition of the dualities which Hegel is trying to overcome. But Spinoza is important for the opposite reason to Kant, viz., that he believed in the unity of everything in the absolute which was both God and also the whole. Everything is linked in a totality which is dependence on the Absolute which is God. Spinoza thus comes very close to the Hegelian position, and now when we have got to the stage of seeing reality as totality expressive of essence is the time to take our position vis-à-vis Spinoza.

For close as Spinoza is to Hegel, there are important differences. The point is that because Spinoza is close, the expression of these differences is one of the best ways Hegel knows of making clear his own position. Hence he does so frequently.

The difference can be summed up in categories which only will come clear at the end of this section, that for Spinoza the absolute is only substance and not subject. The absolute is what lies behind, and cannot be equated with any particular thing in the world. All determination is negation, the principle of Spinoza which Hegel makes his own, but from this Spinoza holds that the absolute is beyond determination, is beyond negation. But this Absolute is one in which particular things sink without trace, it is simple self-identity. And for this reason, it remains a pure hidden inner reality; and hence it is a reality without inner movement, which is not conceived as such that the external determinate things can be deduced from it, or flow out of it in virtue of its own nature.

The Hegelian absolute, on the other hand, contains negation, it is determined to go beyond itself, to go into its other, determinate being. Hence for Hegel but not for Spinoza, the external reality of the world is not just there, not simply something found, but an order which manifests an inner necessity. Spinoza’s God being pure and beyond determination is a pure inner, and hence the reality of the world is a pure outer in the Hegelian sense. Hegel likens this notion of the emanation of particulars from the absolute to that we find in some eastern religions, in which the Absolute is light which streams forth, gradually losing its nature as it issues in lower and lower beings. Hegel seems to think that some such idea underlies the religion of the ancient Persians, but something of the same notion is found in Neo-Platonism. Hegel rather sweepingly calls this an oriental cast of thought, and connects Spinoza’s adoption of it with his Jewish origin, for it is ‘in general the oriental way of seeing things, according to which the nature of the finite world seems frail and transient, that has found its intellectual expression in his system’ (EL, § 151 Addition).16

Reciprocally, the particular is thought of as disappearing, but not as inwardly related to the absolute as it is with Hegel, where the nature of the absolute can be read out of the contradictions in the particular. What we lack in Spinoza is thus the idea of contradiction, of the unity of opposites, which is the source of movement, and which affects the absolute, God himself. Spinoza’s philosophy lacks the contradiction of an absolute which is the source and fount of all particular, and yet which has particularity in it; which is over and against the particular and which nevertheless contains it. Hence the world which we see as emanation from this absolute lacks necessity. There are all sorts of particulars. The absolute has an undetermined number of attributes. Although Spinoza only names two, extension and thought, he does not see that these are the only two and that they are related by the necessity of being the two contradictory sides of the absolute, whose contradiction is the source of movement. They are united, but without their opposition being seen, hence they are immobile, and without necessary connection.

Because Spinoza’s absolute is immobile in itself, we have to think of its modes as arising from its contact with an understanding, which does not really have a place in the system. Spinoza’s is still a system where a pure inner is balanced by an outer. But the distinction between inner and outer refers to an observer which is still unintegrated in the system. It is relative to him that modes exist. In contrast, Hegel’s is a system in which the observer is integrated, and in which ultimately, as we shall see, the duality between observer and reality is overcome.

The defects of Spinoza’s system are matched by defects of his method, which proceeds more geometrico. For this involves taking certain definitions as starting point; but as starting point their inner necessity is not seen. The Hegelian system by contrast, claims to be thoroughgoing, seamless necessity.

At the end of the Remark where he discusses Spinoza in WL, Hegel takes up Leibniz, who is guilty of an opposite error. Leibniz has in the monad the notion of a subjectivity which is such that it manifests itself in its properties. It issues necessarily in its properties and is conscious of them. But this is compensated for by Leibniz’ idea of a multiplicity of such monads which see the world from different points of view. This multiplicity is not derived, so that it cannot be seen as the manifestation of necessity. Rather Leibniz has recourse weakly to God who is thought to have made a system of pre-established harmony out of them. But they are not harmonized out of themselves. It is not immanent in them that they are in harmony. This harmony is something purely external, and hence is also something internal, hidden in the designs of God.

Spinoza’s notion of the absolute as without contradiction, and hence movement, is what makes his absolute just substance and not subject. For the subject is what moves itself, and what is conscious of itself, hence is necessarily other than itself, in Hegel’s view.

So much for Spinoza. Hegel thus rejects the notion of an undetermined Absolute. But this of course was already rejected with the distinction between outer and inner, for an undetermined absolute is a pure inner. We come back thus to Reality as manifestation, and we take up the dialectic of contingency and necessity.

Possibility, reality and necessity
Hegel starts off his discussion of these modal concepts with the concept of possibility. In its lowest form this is often taken as bare possibility, as simple non-contradiction. (This, of course, Hegel hastens to add, amounts to a contradiction, since everything which is real-and hence also possible-is really in contradiction with itself.) But the purely possible, as what is not contradictory, includes just about anything. Things seem non-contradictory when we take a partial view of them, as we saw earlier in the discussion of identity. So anything can be seen as possible under some frame of abstraction. For instance, the moon could fall on the earth this evening, or the Turkish sultan can become Pope (EL, § 143, Addition, 324).17

But this is a thoroughly uninteresting notion of possibility. We can think of it as covering a wider scope than the actual, but it only does in a rather Pickwickian way. We move therefore to a fuller, more grounded sense of ‘possible’, what is really possible. But the really possible is related to the actual. Something can only be judged as really possible against some background of presumed reality; this is what makes a given outcome possible or impossible. Whether something is possible or impossible ‘depends on the content’ (loc. cit.).

This conception of possibility thus is applied only in relation to a system of reality, it is not a simple concept like the previous one which was supposed to repose only on the non-contradictory nature of the content considered. Now a content is possible because it can be grounded in what is real. The relation of grounding comes back, though not in the same terms. The possible in this sense is thus not simply opposed to the real, but related to it. More, we can say that the real and the possible are one, for what makes content A possible is a state of affairs B, which can permit it to happen, which might ground it, which is latent with the potentiality for A. Thus Hegel moves with real possibility to the Aristotelian notion of potentiality. B is the potentiality of A, when realized in A it is actual. Hence the ‘possibility of A’ is also a reality, viz. B.

Contingency is the category which first arises from the relation of reality to possibility. The contingent is something real, but considered against a field of possibilities, of which others could have been realized. If it was the only possible outcome, then it is not contingent. In the light of bare possibility, everything is contingent. But when we begin to consider real possibility, then not everything is contingent. On the contrary, some outcomes are ruled out, and others are unavoidable, given the surrounding conditions. In other words, some outcomes are necessary.

Hence the notion of real possibility brings us to the notion of real necessity. Real necessity is still not absolute necessity which no longer reposes on any contingency; for it is circumscribed. A given outcome is only necessary, i.e., inevitable, given certain conditions. But these conditions being given is contingent. Nevertheless, we see that with the idea of realities conditioning each other, which was introduced with real possibility, we necessarily introduce real necessity. Hence this too arises from a combination of possibility and actuality. It is what adheres to a certain actual states of affairs, seen against the background of possibles, as the only possible outcome. (EL, § 147.)

Hence real necessity and contingency are both concepts which can be applied only on the basis of some application of ‘possible’ and ‘actual’. If we do not want to deal with an empty sense of contingency, linked to bare possibility, we have to consider the contingent as the actual which could have been otherwise, that is, where the conditioning actuality would have allowed another outcome. And the real necessary is what could not have been otherwise. In both cases, we are dealing with reality as systematically related, as conditioning and conditioned. Thus real necessity is still inseparably linked with contingency. What is really necessary, is also from another point of view contingent. B follows from A, but A might not have happened. And reciprocally contingency is also from another point of view real necessity. We say A is contingent when A’ could also have followed from B. But what made A and not A’ happen was differential factor F, and A is a real necessity given Band F. Thus Hegel calls this natural or real necessity ‘relative’ (WL, II, 179) or ‘outer’ (EL, § 148). For it depends on something else.

But we also know that things are bound together by a kind of necessity which is absolute or unconditioned. ‘The absolutely necessary is only because it is; it has beyond this neither condition nor ground’ ( WL, II, 182). It is causa sui. For the system of necessary changes as a whole reposes on nothing outside itself, no foundation which would be outside the web of necessity.

What then is the relation of these two kinds of necessity? It is absurd to deny contingency any place, and to consider it just a ‘subjective representation’. (EL, § 145, Addition.) In this paragraph, Hegel admonishes those philosophers who would try to do away with it altogether and deduce everything. Sciences which try this become merely ‘empty juggling and wooden pedantry’ (eine leere Spielerei and ein steifer Pedantismus, loc. cit.). So much for a proceeding which is often attributed to Hegel by his critics!

On the contrary, as we have seen earlier, contingency has its place of necessity. Its relation to necessity is what we described earlier, in the discussion on Ground, as ‘intersticial’. But we could also describe it as ‘superficial’.18 The basic categorial structure of the world is of necessity. But by the very fact that this must be embodied (the categories of embodiment and exteriority also must have application), it must exist in a form which is ‘external’, that is, not all of whose aspects exhibit perfectly the inner connection of necessity. The surface, or detailed aspects of things are thus, indeed must be contingent.

Now things exhibit connections which are merely of real necessity when we single them out by these surface or detailed aspects. My car is smashed because of my driving over the icy road. This is indeed a contingent event. It could have been other, were it not for certain differential factors (e.g. my deciding to go out on this day). But this contingency is evident because I single out the entity concerned as ‘a car’, or even more particularly as ‘my car’. If I consider it as a finite thing, then I see that it must go under, although the day and manner of its passing is contingent. Or as Hegel puts it, we see conditions and conditioned reality as separate, independent (selbständig) existents over against each other because of the ‘limited content’ of the matter we are considering (EL, § 148). But on a deeper level, conditions and conditioned are inwardly linked, they are identical as well as different. The form which is evident on this deeper level is that of necessary connection: the car as a finite thing must break up some day. But on the superficial or detailed level the content does not exhibit the form. Hence there is contingency: that this accident comes today.

Thus in fact real necessity is an sich also contingency. – This becomes evident first in the following way: the really necessary is indeed necessary in its form, but in its content it is limited and it has its contingency through this content.

(WL, II, 180)

Since the content is external to the form, it is ‘external’ to itself, i.e., contingent (EL, § 148).

In this section Hegel is not really deriving absolute necessity out of real necessity. Rather unconditioned necessity has already been established, for we know we are dealing with a self-subsistent system of necessary relations. What he does show is the relation between the two, the manner of their coexistence, one might say. And here there is a crucial point in the transition from real to absolute necessity. Real necessity was united with contingency, but just immediately. At this stage ‘necessity has not yet determined itself out of itself to contingency’ (WL, II, 179).

This is what is achieved by absolute necessity. It shows how contingency must exist, it as it were produces it out of itself. But then the two do not just coexist. Necessity has the higher place. Real necessity shows us necessary consequences of contingent conditions. Necessity is an island in a sea of contingency. But in the category of absolute necessity the position is reversed. Contingency is rather the ornament borne by the necessary structure of things.

Thus necessity shows itself as self-conditioned, as dependent only on itself. But this means that necessity is ultimately the same as freedom. We ordinarily complain that necessity is the opposite of free purposeful action. Necessity is blind, while free purposive action sees its end (EL, § 147, Addition).19 But necessity is only blind when it is thus joined with contingency, so that we cannot see the connection between the terms it joins. We have seen however, that this contingency is a mere surface on necessity. Properly understood, this underlying necessity, seen as really reposing on itself, is fully transparent. Moreover, we will not just mean transparent to us or some observing consciousness, but transparent as the emanation of reason which produces the totality of the real. Hence it will be transparent to an underlying reason. But this is the formula for self-consciousness, for purposive action: that what exists is transparent for that which posits it. Hence the truth of necessity, what it is basically, is what Hegel calls the Concept (EL, § 147 Addition, 332). And the structure of the world and history should be seen as the result of purpose.

This is what makes sense of the notion of divine providence. Certain philosophers and ordinary men believe that divine providence has no room for necessity. But this is to reduce providence to ‘a blind, irrational caprice’ (einer blinden, vernunftlosen Willkür, EL, § 147 Addition, 332). For Hegel God is Geist. He is the subject which is at the same time the rational structure of the whole. Hence necessity is his trade mark, not a limitation on him.

Hegel takes the occasion to make a comparison with the ancients’ idea of fate. This was really external necessity, one which seemed to contradict freedom. But providence is not to be contrasted with fate in that it no longer partakes of necessity. Rather the difference is that fate took no account of men as subjects – or even of Gods – whereas in the Christian religion is the idea that the absolute is subject, and that in going over into something else, in death, we are united as throughout life with the life of absolute subject. Hence all adversity has this consolation, that we are in a sense always one with ourselves, once we see ourselves as emanations and vehicles of absolute subject. This is the ‘consolation’ of the Christian religion, and it is as consolation that providence is to be distinguished from fate, not by the absence of necessity. Our fate thus partakes of necessity, but not of a foreign or inscrutable one, rather of a necessity which expresses rational subjectivity in which we partake, and hence we are never in exile, but always bei sich.

More precisely, the consoling power of the Christian religion lies in this, that because in it God himself is known as the absolute subjectivity, and subjectivity in its turn contains the moment of particularity, it follows that our particularity too is recognized as something which is not just to be abstractly negated, but which at the same time is to be preserved.

(EL, § 147, Addition, 334)

Substance
From absolute necessity Hegel goes over to the last and culminating triad of the Book on Essence, which he calls absolute relation. We already saw in the relation between absolute necessity and freedom, that we are about to step over into the categories of the Concept. But Hegel first wants to develop further the relation of the totality to its elements, and in so doing he will deduce and incorporate into his system the Kantian analogies of experience, with the concepts of substance, causality and interaction.

We started the book of Essence with the conception of a self-subsistent system of necessary changes which we established basically with Infinity. Throughout this book Hegel has been spelling out the implications of this notion. He showed first that a system of this kind is a totality of necessary connections where each element must be explained out of the whole chain. For an adequate explanation must exhibit its necessity, but its necessity only flows out of the whole system of necessary links. Thus we learnt in the dialectic of Ground that the necessary derivation of things from sufficient reason could only be satisfied by relating them to the whole of which they are a phase. The task from then on till the end of Essence is one of relating this whole with the multiplicity of its elements.

Through the dialectic of things and properties, of law, of form and content, of whole and part, and finally of inner and outer, we discover that the whole of necessary connection cannot be seen as some force separate from and/or behind the external manifold. For contradiction which is the motor of necessary movement affects all reality. Thus the inner connectedness of things, or the totality, cannot lie behind but must be immanent to external reality. This is what is expressed in the category of Wirklichkeit. Necessity flows out of things themselves, and is thus manifest in them.

But at the same time, just because the inner unity is not separate from the outer elements, it can be thought of as all-embracing, all-powerful. To the extent that it were separate, the uniting power it wielded would not be total because some aspect of the external elements would escape it. If it shaped external reality from outside, then the original existence of this reality would be presupposed, not derived from necessity, But if the uniting power is fully immanent in things, then they are entirely under its sway; their unfolding is simply the manifestation of this power.

Further, a necessity which is all-embracing is absolute or unconditioned in the sense of relying on no merely given premiss. And indeed, that the necessity is absolute follows from the fact that we are dealing with a self-subsistent system of changes, powered by contradiction, and hence coming about of necessity.

Reality is thus deployed by an all-embracing and unconditional necessity. This necessity can be seen as a substance underlying the ‘accidents’ of external reality, more, a substance which deploys these accidents. It is a substantial power (Macht). We thus come to the vision of Spinoza, which is really what Hegel builds on here to write the finale of Essence. The substance which is the totality of its accidents, and which is this totality as deployed in a certain order or structure, is the power which underlies this deployment. The totality, which is present in our dialectic since the exit from Ground, now comes to have the quality of agency, comes to be seen as what actively posits the external reality, a feature which was implicit in it all along.

This substance is already referred to in the Absolute which opens this last division of Essence in WL. But in both logics, substance cornes out clearly in the first term of the last triad.

For having arrived at Actuality, Hegel now has to make clearer what this unity between the inner cohesion of the totality and its external multiplicity amounts to. He did this first in setting out the relations of contingency and necessity, and showing that contingency itself emanates from the necessary structure of things, and is not outside it. But this relation was laid out in the abstraction of modality, as it were, in the phase discussed above. It remains to be vindicated in the concrete form which should be evident in our most concrete terms for relatedness, causality.

Hence the last phase is concerned mainly with causality. But the causality is seen within the context of a vision of the unity of everything in substance. Hegel throws in interaction and hence can set up this last triad as a kind of reminiscence/commentary on the Kantian analogies. But this is rather misleading and unfortunate. Interaction turns out to be a rather inexact term, as Hegel is forced to say in EL (§ 156, Addition).

The beginning point in substance is not at all artificial, however. We have the Spinoza-derived vision of everything as posited by substantial power. Absolute necessity is absolute relation (WL, II, 185). This is being which is because it is, which is absolute mediation of itself with itself. The ‘accidents’ are independent realities, which nevertheless are inwardly related, they are the potentiality to each other’s actuality, and therefore have the determination to go over into each other. The inner is now no separate entity, but a power over them, which is also their power. It is the power to create and to destroy, and in destroying to create afresh. Substance is thus the power which deploys and hence does away with real external subsistent entities, which are therefore seen as its ‘accidents’.

But substance is the necessity, the power which is fully manifest. Hence it is entirely deployed in the creation and destruction of accidents; and these ‘accidents’ are subsisting entities. Hence this same power must also be seen as the flow of necessitation which runs between the entities; but this is the relation of cause to effect.

Causality
When we look at this relation, the basic relation which we are trying to understand comes out again, the problem to be reconciled is again posed: how to put together inner necessity with real subsistent difference? Taking this basic relation as one of substance-accidents we accentuate the processual unity. But we are immediately reminded that the accidents are self-standing; and hence that they must be seen as in causal relation to each other. And thus the problem arises of finding our way back: of showing through the causal relation itself, that is the relation of the accidents among themselves, their inherence in the self-generating totality, which is defined as causa sui, being which is because it is.

This is not easy, and it is not clear how Hegel thinks he has done it. The nature of the relationship is perhaps a little clearer than the transition. In fact causality is seen as one of these imperfect manifestations of the underlying necessity of things, a manifestation which is affected with externality. This external causality is thus seen as referring beyond itself to its inclusion in a deeper, more essential relatedness of the totality.

Causality is external in the sense that it lies between terms which are only contingently related. There is no necessary relation between cause and effect, as we have learnt from Hume. But while for empiricist consciousness this is the end of the matter, for Hegel the externality of causality is just the reflection of a deeper link of necessity which is fundamental to things. Its being fundamental to things is the fact that the very structure of things follows a necessary order of deployment. Things are connected of necessity, but this necessity also calls for an externality where this connection is looser, is not purely transparent or entirely reflected in things. This is what we see in causality.

In both logics Hegel starts off by laying out two aspects of causality which seem to reflect its nature as the trace of some deeper unity. On one hand, cause and effect are thought of as joined in necessity, and they are certainly correlative terms: no cause without effect and vice versa. We can even see a single content which joins them, which is the point of their meeting. Thus when we say that the rain wet the grass, the wetness appears in both terms. This reflects the inner unity of the two. But this is of course not the whole story. The identical term, here wetness, is embedded on both sides in different terms which each have other properties, not inwardly related to wetness or each other. That the rain wet the grass tells us that wetness in the form of water which fell from the sky is what is responsible for this state of wetness of the lawn. This is what is informative, and not the tautological reference to wetness. Explanation by cause thus must go beyond this tautology, and this is its externality.

Hence we have in cause/effect a relation which reflects an inner identity, yet projected into mutual exteriority. This reading of causality is further reflected in Hegel’s dealing with the potential infinite regress of causes and progress of effects. Efficient causation being never complete calls always for further terms, both to explain the transition between cause and effect, and to explain the occurrence of the cause itself. Hence every effect is also in another aspect a cause, and every cause an effect. This, Hegel comments, shows the identity of cause and effect. But because this identity is here affected with exteriority, it comes in the form of an endless series. Each cause is effect but only of something else, not of itself; and similarly each effect is cause.

Having reached an endless progress, we can see that it is time as far as Hegel is concerned to transit to a new plane, and this is what Hegel proceeds to do through the rather inadequate term of interaction. The argument is that each effect also helps to determine itself, and helps to determine the cause as well; so that there is not only action but reaction. But the action and reaction of Newton are not really what Hegel has in mind as the synthesis here. And this he makes clear in EL (Addition to § 156) where he points out that ordinary reflection often has recourse to this category of interaction when it wants to explain a kind of causation from totality which is much deeper.

The examples he takes are rather revealing of what this causation from totality is. They are the relations between organs and their functions in an organism, and the relation between a people’s laws and customs on one hand, and their constitution on the other. The remarks in this Addition are clearly to be put in relation to the passage in WL (II, 193–4) where Hegel says that causal relations can not be applied globally to relations in the organic or spiritual realms. Speaking of the laws of the Spartans in relation to their constitution in the Addition mentioned, Hegel points out that they cannot be treated just as independent terms of a causal relation, but each must be seen as moments of a third, higher entity, their ‘Concept’ (Begriff).

What Hegel is referring to is what I have just called causation out of the totality. We encounter this in fields where we apply teleological explanations (in the sense of inner teleology), or where we invoke relations of meaning. Thus we might explain a given note in an étude or a given brush stroke in a painting by their role in the whole structure of music or visual tableau they help constitute. Or–more controversially – we might seek to explain a given practice or institution of a people (the Spartan constitution) by its place in their whole way of life of which it is part expression.

It is obvious here that we are dealing with totality in a strong sense, i.e., one whose specification could not be given in terms of descriptions of particulate elements, but on the contrary where we cast light on the nature of these elements by revealing their relation to the whole.

It was this kind of explanation which provided the sufficient reason by which we resolved the dilemma of Ground. And we can see that it cannot be understood as a unilateral causal relation between particular features. On the contrary, it accounts for a given feature by reference to the totality; a totality, moreover, of which this feature is an essential part, so that the explicandum in this mode of explanation is not distinct from the explicans. But even an account in terms of reciprocal causation, action and reaction between elements in a system, is not adequate, since it misses the crucial factor, recourse to the totality.

This is the kind of explanation, Hegel claims, which is suitable for organic and spiritual life. But it is also the kind of causation implicit in his Spinoza-derived vision of the universe as substance. Substance is power deploying the particular entities in the world. It is a totality which can be thought of as causa sui because it unfolds according to an inner necessity. The existence of particular elements is explained out of the global necessity. We can see this more clearly by referring back to what we know of Hegel’s vision. The structure of the world, that it contains matter, time and space, life on all levels, finite spirit, all this can be seen as existing of necessity following the requirement that Geist be. But then the existence of any of these features must be explained by the whole formula of necessity of which it is an essential part.

Part of what is shown to be necessary, however, is precisely reality which is partes extra partes, which is external to itself; where the links of all reality to all reality are no longer fully transparent, or transparently reflected. But if there is to be real externality, it is not enough that these links be not visibly necessary, i.e., that they be fully necessary in fact, only just not transparendy so. They must also be real links which are less than fully conceptually necessary. These are really links and hence necessary in a sense, but this necessity is ‘real ’, not absolute. It is dependent, and hence bound up with contingency. In other words, there must be contingency, as we saw above. And these contingent links will hold between entities (e.g., slippery roads and crushed fenders) which are really independent of each other in the sense that their entering into these relations is not part of their concept.

These are causal relations. They correspond to a certain way of looking at things, but also to a certain level of reality. In some aspects, things are just to be understood as linked by causal relations. But once we move to another level, we have to go beyond this relation between independent terms, and understand them out of totality. We have to go beyond causality. This is what ordinary understanding has the greatest difficulty doing, and when it is really stuck with what is obviously a system, it has recourse to interaction, which is simply the reciprocal relation of particular terms.

Hence we come to the most concrete representation of totality, one which is nevertheless made up of independent realities. In a sense, as we progress through Essence, the external realities take on more independence, more reality (more Selbstäjidigkeit). With Ground, they were still just opposed properties which went to ground. What came out of Ground, were or could be entities but in Thing, we were still dealing with properties. From Appearance on it has been clear that we are dealing with separate entities, and hence the aspect of their exteriority has always been kept in view. And as we move into Wirklichkeit, we stress this independence all the more in that this external reality is not any shadow of some truer reality behind, but really has the solidity which it appears to have. Hence we reach here the fullest solidity of external being. And this is necessary for the system, since we have seen that it is one in which the inner, Geist, can only exist in external reality; hence the reality of the inner depends on the solidity of the outer.

But for this very reason inner necessity and outer reality cannot be reconciled at the expense of the latter. The reality of externality must be maintained. So for this reason, the totality of Ground wherein sufficient reason could be found for everything had to go along with the real difference of particular ground and grounded; the system of absolute necessity not only had to go along .with contingency, but produced it necessarily out of itself. This relationship of opposition and necessitation, of presupposition which is taken back in subordination, is expressed or struggling to be expressed in the dialectic of modality.

But it comes to its fullest, most concrete expression in the dialectic of causality. For here we can see a real exteriority of particular causes and effects, a multiplicity without number of such relations, but which are part of a system which can only be explained in its structure out of totality. Moreover, this totality, being ruled by necessity, and requiring that there be exteriority, necessarily posits causality as an external kind of necessity, one which unites necessity with contingency.

Hence we have the ascending and descending relation: external causality cannot suffice to explain the whole, it runs simply to endless regress, and it refers us beyond itself to explanation out of totality. This totality once understood shows us the necessity of this external causality. We thus have the concrete expression of the kind of totality relation we have been heading for, one which fills out the more abstract discussion of modality above.

The transition out of causality shows the ascending movement. As I mentioned above it is not clear whether this is meant to stand as an independent argument or simply to apply the conclusions of the earlier argument to causality. Certainly the transition both in WL (II, 198–202) and in EL (§ 154) resembles much more a reading of the causal relation in terms of his ontological vision.

Hegel does not even invoke the endless regress as an argument. He presents it rather as a result of the exteriority of the finite (EL, § 153, Addition). Cause and effect are really one ‘in their concept’, but in finite reality a given cause is an effect only in another relation. Thus the slippery road, cause of my dented fender, is an effect, but of something else, e.g., the freezing rain.

The transition is WL draws on what we have learnt in the earlier categories of Essence. Cause seems to work on effect as on another, passive substance. But the passive substance, which suffers external force, is really such that its nature is to be posited by something else. ‘The passive substance is, through the operation of force, only posited as what it in truth is’ (200). So that the effects turns out to be something which it works on itself. But then this reacts on the first substance, which no longer can be seen as simply active substance, as sole cause. We thus come to action and reaction; and from there Hegel moves on to totality. In this way the endless progress of finite causation is ‘bent back’ on itself into an ‘infinite interaction’ (202).20

This latter image hints at some of the underlying considerations of this transition. The row of causes in an efficient causal chain simply form a cut in reality. To single them out presupposes that one could also take a broader sweep and look not just at term A producing B, but at the system formed by A and B together, or A and B and other terms together. But when one does this, then one is bound to rise to a view in which one sees things in interaction.

This is undoubtedly well founded. When one shows the pressure of a gas to be a function of its temperature, this is a cut in a system of interacting elements which relates pressure, temperature, and other properties. We reach a more complete explanation by rising to this more systematic level.

But, of course, rising to the point where one sees the system in interaction does not entail that one arrives at the point where we explain the features of the system out of totality. We may remain within the bounds of good old efficient causality, as in the theory of gases example above. The necessity to move to causation out of the totality is something that must be established independently of the necessity to move to the perspective of systematic interaction. Hegel clearly admits this in the Addition to § 156 of EL.

In fact, we seem to have once more a case where Hegel is sure of an ascending transition because he is already sure of it; where he gives us what are only hints and traces of the higher reality which the lower is meant to be an emanation from, and takes these for a proof. The necessity to move to interaction or to the systemic perspective, can indeed be seen as a trace of the Concept; but it does not establish it. This conviction reposes rather elsewhere. The transition from interaction to causation out of totality is already there and is grounded on the whole earlier argument of the Logic, on the very conception of Essence as totality whose parts follow one on another of necessity.

Anyway, with this most concrete expression of the vision of necessity positing contingency, we come to the full expression of objective logic. Essence is now one with Being, for it is fully manifested in Being. What does not directly manifest necessity, viz. contingent relations, still is its manifestation, since this contingency itself is necessary. Hence we have a set of relations between things, which are relations to self. We have what amounts to immediate being, that of the whole system, which is mediation with self. We have subsistent realities which are nevertheless involved in an infinite self-relation, an identity (EL, § 157).

Substance thus as the inner necessity which posits outer reality is really the Concept. The Concept is an inner conceptual necessity that produces, or issues into an external reality which expresses it. The final development of Substance – or the truth as Hegel calls it – which is in turn the truth of Being and Essence – is the Concept.

The truth of Substance is the Concept – the independence which is a thrusting of itself off from itself into distinct and independent units, and which as this repulsion is identical with itself; a reciprocal movement which remains self-present [bei sich selbst bleibend] and interacts with itself.

(EL, § 158)

But the Concept as an inner conceptual formula which produces a world according to its own inner necessity, has taken us beyond the realm of blind necessity into that of subjectivity, of freedom. We have a necessity which is all-embracing and absolute, which reposes only on itself, which is fully transparent; it produces an order out of itself out of a necessity which is its own nature; what can this be but freedom? Hence ‘The truth of necessity is...freedom’ (loc. cit.).

In the Addition to this paragraph Hegel returns to the relation of necessity and freedom. Ordinary consciousness sets them against each other. Necessity seems hard because it decrees that what I am immediately must go under. But real freedom is not crushed in this, only the false arbitrary will (Willkür, ‘the freedom which is as yet without content and merely potential’, § 158 Addition). But true freedom is attained by penetrating to the inner identity underneath the enforced transformations of necessity. The freedom of a civilized man is not to be found in defiance of the laws which necessitate his being other than he immediately is, but rather in his finding his own identity in this change, in this transformation of himself. He then understands and lives the rational necessity which corresponds to his own nature, which came first in the guise of external necessity, but which as rational, and his own, is freedom. Freedom is in living in rational, i.e., one’s own, necessity. But this calls for the transformation of what one is immediately. Hence it may appear to the undeveloped man like an external imposition, a restriction of freedom. Such a man is living on the level of contingency, of pure externality, as though he were a thing. But the nature of man as Geist is to live the negation of his immediate nature which things only suffer; hence to negate this immediacy and make himself over, and to find his freedom in the necessity.

Necessity is thus the outer form of freedom. And since we live the outer before we live the inner it is the presupposition. ‘Freedom has necessity as its presupposition, and contains it as cancelled [aufgehoben] within itself’ (loc. cit.). Those who have not grasped this inwardly will not understand. The criminal sees his punishment as restriction of his freedom: but his punishment is not a foreign force, but the manifestation of his own action. Once he recognizes this, he comports himself as a free man (loc. cit.). This is what Spinoza called the amor intellectualis Dei.

It is having arrived at this freedom which takes us now to the subject, so that the next book of the Logic, dealing with the Concept, will be the subjective logic. This freedom which is at one with reality, as existent is the ‘I’, ‘as developed to its totality it is free spirit, as feeling, love, as enjoyment, bliss [Seeligkeit]’ (EL, § 159).

 

 

1 Johnston and Struthers translation II, 15.

2 This alone provides the basis of informative identity statements, as Hegel points out in the second Remark to section A of this chapter (WL, II, 30).

3 This is the kind of switch we shall see later in the proofs for the existence of God, where what is second in ratio essendi is primary in ratio cognoscendi.

4 I am following the line of thought in WL here, that in EL is somewhat different but turns on the same basic contradiction.

5 E.g., the discussion in Chapter m of the PhG.

6 In ordinary life says Hegel in EL (§121, Addition) we often use explanations which fail to distinguish explicandum and explicans, as for instance, when we explain some electrical phenomenon by reference to electricity. Nothing is wrong with these explanations in the context of ordinary life. But this kind of reason is unsatisfactory for philosophy, because the ground is not yet articulated in a whole whose structure is necessary. Ground has as yet no ‘an und für sich bestimmten Inhalt’. We have not yet really got to what is active (thätig) and productive (hervorbringend, cf. § 122). Hence at this ordinary level anything goes. A reason can be found for anything.

The argument is different in EL than in WL, and the transition turns rather on the unsatisfactoriness of this ordinary giving of reasons in which good grounds can be found for and against anything depending on which description of it you select.

7 William Wallace translation.

8 William Wallace translation (amended).

9 (EL § 125) Hegel cannot resist remarking here that in many European languages ‘have’ is used to form the past tense, hence is connected with ‘aufgehobenes Sein’, and hence with Wesen, which as we saw is also related to the past participle of to be.

10 Gf. Eugene Fleischmann, La Science Universelle, Paris, Plon, 1968, p. 166.

11 This is already made in WL, where Ding is the first part of the second triad, rather than the last part of the first, as in EL – another sign of the essential looseness in the links of the Logic.

12 Johnston and Struthers translation I, 134.

13 William Wallace translation. Wallace has managed to capture Hegel’s pun here : ‘gehen zu Grunde’ ordinarily means to collapse or go to ruin. But in Hegelian terms the demise of a thing is also its return from particularity to the life of the totality which sustains it, i.e., to its ground.

14 William Wallace translation (amended).

15 p. 321, cf. famous quote about the rational and the real.

16 The reference to Spinoza is relegated to the Addition to § 151 in EL.

17 William Wallace translation.

18 This also reminds us of the discussion of Ground, where Hegel points out that a reason can be given for anything, just by considering it under some abstracted aspect.

19 Hegel himself uses this image when he speaks of contingency having free play ‘on the surface of nature’, (loc. cit.).

20 Cf. also ‘die absolute Notwendigkeit ist daher blind’ (WL, II, 183).

21 The involved discussion of this passage (WL, II, 198–205) is much easier if we read it with one of Hegel’s paradigm examples of causation out of totality in mind, e.g., the relations between the customs and constitution of a people; and also if we read it together with the recap at the beginning of Book in, (WL, III, 214–16).

Substance splits into two, into articulation. So the spirit of a people has to be embodied in an articulated whole of constitution, customs, way of life, etc. Hence the Spartans have laws and customs, and a constitution. We take the example of the causality between customs and constitution. Here we have two terms, and there must be this duality. There must be external constraining law, to express the necessity of a certain Geist against the weakness and caprice of individuals. But at the same time, without a certain spirit expressed in the customs this law would be corrupted, it would become an outer shell. Thus there is duality, but also a profound unity between the two.

If we turn now to see these two as in causal relation, we can notice that the constitution affects the customs, and vice versa. Each is external to the other. Hence we have what Hegel calls the condition, or pre-supposition of causation (198-9), that the cause presupposes some other substance outside of it to work on. It becomes really cause only in working on this. There is an active substance, e.g. the constitution, and a passive substance, e.g., the customs. So the customs are thought to be presupposed, to have to be already there, for the constitution to work on them.

But in a second moment, we notice that the customs are such that they can only be customs of a people which is organized with a constitution of this sort; there could not be such customs among people who, say, were organized under an oriental despotism, or a loose tribal system. So that what seems to be presupposed is also really posited by its relation to the constitution (and, of course, all the other aspects of the society’s life – in causality we are just isolating certain elements). Thus

‘The passive substance is, through the operation of force, only posited as what in truth it is; that is, because it is simple positive or immediate substance, it is just for that reason only something posited; the prior existence which it has as a condition [das Voraus, das sie als Bedingung ist] is the show of immediacy which operative causality strips away from it.’ (WL, II, 200)

Immediately before Hegel says ‘what has force over the other only has it because it is the latter’s power, which manifests in this both itself and the other’.

Thus instead of seeing the passive substance, say the customs, as just there waiting to be worked on, as in the first moment, we now see them as such that they are necessarily emanations from this influence, really the inner spirit that flows through both constitution and customs in their mutual relations. We see them as the manifestation of something deeper, viz, this Geist. Hence we see them for the first time in their truth, viz. as emanations of this something deeper, for this is their nature, to be posited by this deeper reality, which works through all the mutual influences of the different aspects of society, including that influence we are now looking at, viz., that of constitution on customs.

But then in a third moment, we find that having admitted that only in being worked on by the other aspects of society (here the constitution) is the passive substance (the customs) what it really (an sich) is, we can turn this around and say that this being worked on is the realization of the passive substance’s own ansich. In other words, being worked on in this way is a realization of what these customs really are, they of their own nature call for being held in place by such a constitution. Hence they are not just passive substance, but themselves cause.

‘Thus on one hand the passive substance is preserved or posited by the active one...on the other hand, it is the operation of the passive substance itself to join with itself [mit sich zusammengehen] and thus to make itself original and cause.’ (WL, II, 201)

But then two things follow from this. First, the second substance can not only be considered in a sense the cause of itself to some degree, but the nature of its relation with the first is reciprocal. It is not just the cause of itself, but also conditions the first. The point is that once we have admitted that this second side, the customs, has as much as the first side the right to be called cause, then we have to admit that it also works on the first, because the reality is that they are complexly intricated together, each works on the other. The customs are what they are only as held in by these laws, but at the same time these customs help to maintain the laws that so hold them in.

Hence we have action and reaction. But this stage in turn must be rapidly by-passed, for we realize that we are not dealing with mechanical action and reaction of separate terms. The truth is that the terms are not separate, that each is internal to the other. Each in going into the other ‘joins with itself (geht mit sich selbst zusammen), or ‘the cause...stands related in the effect to itself as cause’ (WL, II, 203). Or each remains identical with its other (216).

In other words, what we have seen from this is that each term is in a sense internal to the other, that we cannot get to a proper conception of each term without seeing its relation to the others, seeing how the others enter into what it is. What we really have thus is a whole, a spirit of the people, which exists through all these varying aspects and their relation. It is this which re-appears in the definitions of each of these aspects, and hence which makes it such that each is internal to the others. This is the substance.

 
    