## CHAPTER III
## Self-positing Spirit
 

 

1
I have been trying to present in the preceding chapters an idea of the fundamental problems and aspirations which Hegel’s philosophy was addressed to. And I have suggested that we can best see these in the light of the yearning of his time to find a way of life and thought which would unite two powerful aspirations, which were both connected yet opposed. One is to that unity with nature, other men and himself which man demands as an expressive being; the other is to the radical moral autonomy which reached paradigm expression in Kant and Fichte.

I have suggested that Hegel by the early 1800s had come to realize how deeply these two aspirations were opposed to each other. In particular, he had come to see that freedom required the breaking up of expressive unity, of the original undivided wholeness within man and communion with other men and nature, which he like many contemporaries attributed to an earlier ageprincipally that of ancient Greece. The sense of fragmentation within, and of exile in a dead, mechanical universe and society, which so many writers of the age had experienced and testified to, was not an inexplicable and unmitigated loss of an earlier paradise. Rather it was the result of an ineluctable development, essential for the full realization of man as rational and free agent.

But the story was not to end there. This necessary division was to be healed in a higher reconciliation. This reconciliation was already in train, fruit of a rational unfolding of purpose which history exhibits, and which required to be discerned and grasped by philosophy, and hence completed – since this reconciliation, incorporating reason, could only be adequately formulated in the language of reason. Hegel along with many contemporaries believed that his age was the axial period which would see the dawning of this reconciliation. ‘It is surely not difficult to see that our time is a time of birth and transition to a new period’ (PhG, 15).1 And Hegel goes on to speak in this passage of a ‘qualitative leap’ (ein qualitativer Sprung).

Thus the major task of philosophy for Hegel can be expressed as that of over-coming opposition.2 The oppositions are those which arise from the breaking up of the original expressive unity. Hence first, man as knowing subject is separated from nature, which he now sees as brute fact, not expressive of some idea or purpose. Nature is thus other than mind in not exhibiting any rational necessity or expressive form. And when we push this distinction to its furthest conclusion we have to agree with Kant in attributing whatever degree of necessary form we find in experience to our own understanding rather than to the reality which comes to impinge on this understanding. Since some degree of necessary form is essential to experience, we have to admit that reality as it is in itself, that is, unaltered by any structures that we impose on it, is forever beyond our ken. Man’s estrangement from nature makes the world ultimately a terra incognita for him.

This separation which arises with man’s developing self-consciousness about his own thought, becomes an opposition in the sense that nothing is allowed to mediate or bridge the gap between mind and world, everything is either on one side or the other.3 But it is also an opposition in the stronger sense that this separation between mind and world runs counter to the nature and purpose of knowing mind. Thus Hegel will often protest that the Kantian idea of a thing in itself is incoherent, in that the philosopher in using this term is positing something out of the reach of his mind, but which at the same time cannot be out of reach in that he is positing it. (Of course, a Kantian will protest that this ignores the distinction between what can be experienced and what can only be thought, but Hegel’s point is just to challenge this distinction.) Hence the opposition sharpens here. It comes to lie between two requirements laid on the knowing subject, that he come to distinguish himself from his object in full self-consciousness of what he is doing, and that he also know it thoroughly, to its core as it were.

A similar opposition arises within men between their rational will and their own nature, their desires, inclinations, affinities. Once more men come to distinguish the rational determinants of their will in the process of growing self-consciousness, and this seems essential to the growth of rationality itself and freedom. And this separation becomes an opposition in which reason and nature are not only considered to be watertight categories without any intersect, but also are in conflict as they vie for the control of our will. But this conflict is the reflection of an opposition between two requirements which hold of us as agents. On one side we are called on as rational agents to be free, and hence follow reason. On the other side, freedom means acting out of motives which flow from the self rather than being externally imposed or induced. But since I am also a natural being, a conception of freedom which excludes and even opposes natural inclination must be defective.

This opposition between nature and freedom can also be presented in a theoretical mode, as between two kinds of explanation of what men do, by natural necessity and by freely chosen goals, which seem both inescapable and yet in conflict.

Thirdly, the growth of self-consciousness leads the individual to distinguish himself from his tribe or community. And this growing sense of individuality again leads to a practical opposition, a conflict of interest, between man and society, which in turn is based on conflicting requirements of freedom. Man to be free must be his own master, and hence not subordinate to any others. But at the same time man on his own is weak and necessarily dependent on outside help. The freedom of the bare individual is thus a very circumscribed and shadowy thing. But what is more, man as a cultural being only develops a mind and purposes of his own out of interchange with others; the very aspiration to individual freedom is nurtured on this interchange, and can be dulled and perverted by it. So that integral freedom cannot be attained by an individual alone. It must be shared in a society which sustains a culture that nurtures it and institutions which give effect to it. Freedom seems to require both individual independence and integration into a larger life.

The individual man is part not just of a larger social whole, he and his society are in turn set in a wider frame, mankind, and the whole of nature, with which they are in interchange and on which they depend. The development of self-consciousness has meant a separation from these larger frameworks, formerly seen as meaningful orders, now looked on as a set of de facto limits and conditions of our action. We saw above how this separation gives rise to an opposition for the knowing subject. But it creates one for the subject as a free expressive being as well. My freedom is limited by my dependence on the greater framework of nature. But just as with the relation of my reason to my own desires, or my freedom to my society, this dependence creates a dilemma. Or rather it does on the assumption of an expressive theory of man, according to which men seek communion with the larger order of nature. For to be true to ourselves, we seem to have both to separate from and integrate into this larger framework.

We saw in the last chapter how this double requirement of integrating into nature while remaining a spiritual being seemed to many to be met in the conception of a cosmic spirit underlying nature. But we also saw that this merely displaces the dilemma, which now centres on man’s relation to this cosmic spirit. The opposition now lies between the self-dependence and autonomy of finite spirits, which seems to be enjoined on them as rational, hence free agents, and the demands of union with cosmic spirit, without which they remain merely fragmentary beings in opposition to their own vocation to integral expression.

The fourth opposition can thus be described as one between finite and infinite spirit, between the demands of human autonomy and those of participation in the current of infinite life. Hegel saw the solution to this in his notion of Geist, as we saw in the last chapter and shall examine shortly. But this opposition can also be expressed in terms of the concept of fate. From the standpoint of the autonomous, finite subject, the larger course of events which affects him is distinguished from what he does as what happens to him; his fate. This fate is quite distinct from himself, in the sense that it is not at all an expression of him, something one can only find in what he does. From this point of view, that of separation, the injunction of an earlier time to reconcile oneself to fate, to come to see its necessity and hence make peace with it, can only be understood as a call to surrender, not as an invitation to deeper insight.

But the course of things is in some sense an expression of cosmic spirit; and hence to see it as quite other is to define oneself in opposition to cosmic spirit. On the other hand, to be united to infinite spirit, even more to see oneself as its vehicle, would be to recognize in one’s fate an expression of a reality from which one could not dissociate oneself.

The opposition between finite and infinite spirit can therefore also be described as the opposition between the free man’s need to affirm himself against fate, as expressed in Dylan Thomas’ words: ‘do not go gentle into that good night/Rage, rage against the dying of the light’; and the requirement to reconcile oneself with fate, so that in Nietzsche’s words, we can ‘change each “thus it was” into a “thus I would have it’”.4

These then are the oppositions which philosophy must overcome, between the knowing subject and his world, between nature and freedom, between individual and society, between finite and infinite spirit, or between free man and his fate. For philosophy to overcome them is of course for it to discern how the oppositions are overcome of themselves. And ‘overcome’ here does not mean simply ‘undone’; there is no question of returning to the primitive consciousness before the separation of subject and nature. On the contrary the aspiration is to retain the fruits of separation, free rational consciousness, while reconciling this with unity, that is, with nature, society, God and fate.

But how can these oppositions be reconciled when each term only comes to be in its opposition to the other? For this is in fact our problem. Man only attains his self-conscious, rational autonomy in separating off from nature, society, God and fate. And Hegel sees this very clearly, which is why he repudiates any attempt simply to undo the oppositions and return to primitive unity.

Hegel’s answer is that each term in these basic dichotomies when thoroughly understood shows itself to be not only opposed to but identical with its opposite. And when we examine things more deeply we shall see that this is so because at base the very relations of opposition and identity are inseparably linked to each other. They cannot be utterly distinguished because neither can exist on its own, that is, maintain itself as the sole relation holding between a given pair of terms. Rather they are in a kind of circular relation. An opposition arises out of an earlier identity; and this of necessity: the identity could not sustain itself on its own, but had to breed opposition. And from this it follows that the opposition is not simply opposition, the relation of each term to its opposite is a peculiarly intimate one. It is not just related to an other but to its other, and this hidden identity will necessarily reassert itself in a recovery of unity.

That is why Hegel holds that the ordinary viewpoint of identity has to be abandoned in philosophy in favour of a way of thinking which can be called dialectical in that it presents us with something which cannot be grasped in a single proposition or series of propositions, which does not violate the principle of non-contradiction: ~ (p.~p). The minimum cluster which can really do justice to reality is three propositions, that A is A, that A is also ~A; and that ~A shows itself to be after all A.

To grasp this truth of speculation is to see how free subjectivity overcomes its opposition to nature, society, God and Fate, Hegel claims. This is a rather staggering thesis. So much of moment to man seems to ride on what looks very much at first like verbal legerdemain. What does it mean to play fast and loose with ‘identity’ and ‘opposition’, ‘identity’ and ‘difference’? What exactly does the thesis assert, and how does one back it up? Or are we just meant to take Hegel’s word for it?

2
In order to see what Hegel is talking about here we have to understand his notion of Geist, or cosmic spirit. What seems bizarre in the abstract, when we talk of ‘identity’ and ‘difference’ tout court, may seem less so when we apply it to Geist. Now the basic model for infinite spirit is provided for the mature Hegel by the subject. We saw that earlier he tried to account for the reality which overcame separation in terms of Love, or Life. But in his mature view, the crucial term for understanding the Absolute is ‘subject’.5

Before seeing how this term applies to Geist it is worth examining what Hegel’s notion of subject was. And this is the more worthwhile in that his notion is important philosophically in its own right, that is, as a conception of the human subject which breaks with the dualism which had become dominant in philosophy since Descartes among both rationalists and empiricists. Hegel is in fact one of the important links in a chain of thought in modern philosophical anthropology, one which is opposed to both dualism and mechanism, and which we see continued in different ways in Marxism and modern phenomenology.

Hegel’s conception builds on the expressivist theory, which was developed by Herder and others. As we saw, this brought back Aristotelian categories in which we see the subject, man, as realizing a certain form; but it also added another dimension in that it looks on this realized form as the expression, in the sense of clarification, of what the subject is, something which could not be known in advance. It is the marriage of these two models, of Aristotelian form and modern expression, which enables us to speak here of self-realization.

Hegel’s theory of the subject was a theory of self-realization. And as such it was radically anti-dualist. For this expressivist theory is opposed to the dualism of post-Cartesian philosophy (including empiricism), and that on both sides of its ancestry. This dualism saw the subject as a centre of consciousness, perceiving the outside world and itself; which centre was immaterial, that is, heterogeneous from the world of body, including the subject’s own body. The ‘spiritual’ functions of thought, perception, understanding, etc., are attributed to this non-material being. And this ‘mind’ is sometimes thought of as perfectly self-transparent, that is, able to see clearly its own contents or ‘ideas’; (this seems to have been Descartes’ view).

Now, first, this view leaves no place for life as understood in the Aristotelian tradition, that is life as a self-organizing, self-maintaining form, which can only operate in and therefore is inseparable from its material embodiment. This kind of life disappears in dualism, since its whole nature is to straddle the gap dualism opens. It is material, and yet in the maintenance of form it exhibits the kind of purposiveness and even sometimes intelligence which we associate with mind. We feel tempted to think of living things as ‘taking account’ of their surrounding precisely because of the intelligent adaptation which they can make to novel situations.

Dualism on the other hand attributes all these functions of intelligence to a mind which is heterogeneous from body; so that matter is left as something which is to be understood purely mechanistically. In this way, Cartesian-empiricist dualism has an important link with mechanism. Descartes tended to give mechanistic explanations of physiology, and modern mechanistic psychology is closely affiliated historically to empiricism; it is dualism with one term suppressed.

But the modern temptation to dualism arises in a very different philosophical climate from Aristotle’s. It is fed in part by a notion of the will which comes to us from Judaeo-Christian roots and is foreign to Greek thought; it grows with the modern idea of a self-defining subject which we discussed in the first chapter. In short it is bound up with the modern pre-occupations with pure rationality and radical freedom. And as we saw, Hegel has no desire to sweep these aside and return to an earlier phase.

And it is in fact when we focus on pure thought, on the reflective activity of the mind when it is pondering some problem in science or mathematics, when it is deliberating on some principle of morals, that the mind seems to be freest from external control – in a way it does not appear to be, for instance, in our emotional life. It is in this realm that the thesis of dualism seems to be most plausible. While I might hesitate to locate my rage at the enemy, which I can ‘feel’ in my body, in some disembodied haven, where else can I place my purely inner reflections on a problem in logic, or a question of moral conduct?

This is where the other aspect of expressive theory becomes relevant. We saw in the first chapter how Herder developed an expression theory of language along with, and indeed, as an essential part of the expression theory of man. On this theory words have meaning not simply because they come to be used to point or refer to certain things in the world or in the mind, but more fundamentally, because they express or embody a certain kind of consciousness of ourselves and things, peculiar to man as a language-user, for which Herder used the word’ Besonnenheit’. Language is seen not just as a set of signs, but as the medium of expression of a certain way of seeing and experiencing; as such it is continuous with art. Hence there can be no thought without language; and indeed, the languages of different peoples reflect their different visions of things.

Hence this theory of expression is also anti-dualist. There is no thought without language, art, gesture, or some external medium. And thought is inseparable from its medium, not just in the sense that the former could not be without the latter, but also in that thought is shaped by its medium. That is, what from one point of view might be described as the same thoughts are altered, given a new twist, in being expressed in a new medium, for instance, translated from one language to another. To put the point in another way, we cannot clearly distinguish the content of a thought from what is ‘added’ by the medium.

Thus where the Aristotelian conception of the relation of matter and form, or hylomorphism, as it has been called, gives a notion of living beings in which soul is inseparable from body, so this theory of expression gives us a view of thinking beings in which thought is inseparable from its medium. And hence it takes just those functions, of pure thought, reflection, deliberation, which one would be most tempted to attribute to a disembodied mind, and reclaims them for embodied existence as necessarily couched in an external medium.

Thus expressivist theory as a marriage of hylomorphism and the new view of expression is radically anti-dualistic. And so was Hegel’s theory of the subject. It was a basic principle of Hegel’s thought that the subject, and all his functions, however ‘spiritual’, were inescapably embodied; and this in two related dimensions: as a ‘rational animal’, that is, a living being who thinks; and as an expressive being, that is, a being whose thinking always and necessarily expresses itself in a medium.

This principle of necessary embodiment, as we may call it, is central to Hegel’s conception of Geist, or cosmic spirit. But before we go on to look at this notion of Geist, let us see how this expressivist theory of the subject already gives us some basis for speaking of a unity of identity and opposition.

We can see that Hegel’s expressive theory does not see the hiatus between life and consciousness which we find in Cartesian-empiricist dualism. For the latter, the vital functions are relegated to the world of extended, material being, and are to be understood mechanistically; while the functions of mind belong to a separate, non-material entity. Hence Descartes could look on animals as complicated machines. But for any follower of Aristotle, this kind of dichotomy is untenable. For a living thing is a functioning unity and not just a concatenation of parts. More, in maintaining a certain form through changing conditions it shows a sort of proto-purpose, and even a sort of proto-intelligence in adapting to novel circumstances, akin to what self-conscious beings show in explicit form in their striving for goals and their ability to take account of self and surroundings in doing so. The living thing is, in other words, not just a functioning unity, but also something in the nature of an agent; and this places it in a line of development which reaches its apex in the human subject.

In this way Hegel restored the sense of the continuity of living things which was damaged by Cartesianism. But there is not just continuity between ourselves and animals, but also within ourselves between vital and mental functions, life and consciousness. On an expressivist view these cannot be separated out and attributed to two parts, or faculties, in man. Hegel agrees with Herder, that we can never understand man as an animal with rationality added; on the contrary, he is a quite different kind of totality, in which the fact of reflective consciousness leaves nothing else unaltered; the feelings, desires, even the instinct for self-preservation of a reflective being must be different from those of other animals, not to speak of his bearing, bodily structure, the ills he is subject to, and so on. There is no other way of looking at things for whoever sees living beings as totalities, i.e., entities in which each part is what it is only in relation to others and to the whole. And both Aristotelian hylomorphism and the theory of expression makes us look on them as totalities.

This view thus holds not only to a continuity of living things, but also to qualitative discontinuities. Man as a living being is not radically different from other animals, but at the same time he is not just an animal plus reason, he is a quite new totality; and that means he has to be understood on quite principles.6 Hence along with the idea of continuity we have that of a hierarchy of levels of being. We can speak of a hierarchy here and not just different types, because the ‘higher’ ones can be seen as realizing to a greater degree what the lower ones embody imperfectly.

Hegel holds to such a hierarchy of being which reaches its apex is conscious subjectivity. Lower kinds of life exhibit proto-forms as it were of subjectivity; for they show in ascending degree purpose, self-maintenance as life-forms, knowledge of what surrounds them. They become in short more and more like agents, and with the highest animals only want the power of expression to be selves. Hegel extends this hierarchy, as we shall see later, beyond living beings to the whole of creation. We can see a hierarchy among inanimate phenomena which points to the higher stage of life, just as animals point beyond to human subjectivity. Thus just as the living is a proto-form of consciousness, so the unity of, say, the solar system is to be seen as a proto-form of the living.

So far, Hegel’s theory is not very different from that of other expressivist thinkers, Herder for instance. But he also builds into it a contribution from Kantian idealism. Consciousness is not only continuous/discontinuous with life in the way described; it also in a sense ‘negates’ life. For man as a conscious, knowing, rational being aims as we saw at a clarity and self-sufficiency of rational thought which he only attains by separating himself from nature, not only without but also within. Hence he is induced to separate rational thought, to insulate it as it were, from his desires, leanings, affinities; to try to free it as much as possible from the unconscious drift of inclination. Rational consciousness has a vocation to divide man, to oppose itself to life, and it is this of course which finds expression, inter alia, in the theory of Cartesian dualism.

Man is thus inescapably at odds with himself. He is a rational animal, which means a living thinking being; and he can only be a thinking being because he is alive. And yet the exigencies of thinking carry him into opposition to life, to the spontaneous and natural in him; so that he is led to divide himself, to create a distinction and a discord within himself where originally there was unity.

Developed rationality and hence discord is not something man starts with, but something he comes to. And this means two things: first beyond the hierarchy of forms of life, there is a hierarchy of modes of thought. As man’s rational consciousness of himself grows, so his mode of expression of this self-consciousness must alter. His language, art, religion and philosophy must change; for thought cannot alter without a transformation of its medium. Thus there must be a hierarchy of modes of expression in which the higher make possible a more exact, lucid and coherent thought than the lower.

The concept of a hierarchy of this kind plays an important role in Hegel’s thought. It is best known in connection with the distinction between art, religion and philosophy. These are vehicles for understanding spirit, but they are of unequal rank. In a sense we express the same truths in these three modes, only at different levels of adequacy; which is like the other kind of hierarchy where the lower levels contain proto-forms of the higher, that is, they exhibit an impoverished version of the same kind of unity.

Secondly, that rationality is something man achieves rather than starts with, means that man has a history. In order to come to clarity man has to work his way with effort and struggle through the various stages of lesser, more distorted consciousness. He starts as a primitive being and has to acquire culture and understanding painfully and slowly. And this is not an accidental misfortune. For thought or reason can only exist embodied in a living being, as we have seen. But the processes of life itself are unconscious and dominated by unreflecting impulse. To realize the potential of conscious life therefore requires effort, internal division and transformation over time. We can thus see that this transformation over time involves more than the ascent up a hierarchy of modes of consciousness. It requires also that man struggle with impulse and give a shape to his life which moulds impulse into a culture which can express the demands of rationality and freedom. Human history is thus also the ascent up a ladder of cultural forms.

Perhaps we can now cast some light on the puzzling claims made at the end of the last section, that identity and opposition are linked, that they can hold of the same pair of terms. Hegel’s notion of the subject begins to make sense of this.

The thinking rational subject can only exist embodied. In this sense we can truly say that the subject is his embodiment, that, e.g., I as a thinking being am my living body. And yet at the same time this embodiment in life has a tendency to carry us along the stream of inclination, of impulse towards unreflecting unity within ourselves and with nature. Reason has to struggle against this in order to realize itself. And in this sense his embodiment is not only other than the thinking rational subject, but in a sense his opposite, his limit, his opponent.

Thus we can say that the subject is both identical with and opposed to his embodiment. This can be because the subject is not defined by Hegel in one dimension, as it were, as a being with certain properties, but in two. He has certain conditions of existence, those of embodiment; but at the same time, the subject is characterized teleologically, as tending towards a certain perfection, that of reason and freedom, this in line with both Aristotle and expressivist theory. And the demands of this perfection run counter, at least at first, to his conditions of existence.

It is this inner complexity which makes possible its double relation to its self/other. In order to be at all as a conscious being, the subject must be embodied in life; but in order to realize the perfection of consciousness it must fight and overcome the natural bent of life as a limit. The conditions of its existence are in conflict with the demands of its perfection; and yet for it to exist is to seek perfection. The subject is thus necessarily the sphere of inner conflict, may we say, of contradiction? Hegel did not hesitate.

Thus both relations, identity and opposition can be said to hold together. But since one is founded on the unchanging conditions of existence, while the other comes from the requirements of the subject’s realization which it achieves over time, we can think of the two relations as linked in a temporal pattern. Primitive identity must give way to division which inevitably arises since the subject cannot but contain the seed of division within himself.

But how about the third stage in this temporal pattern, the reconciliation? I said at the end of the last section that Hegel held that opposition fully understood shows the recovery of unity. And this too can be seen in Hegel’s theory of the subject. Man does not remain forever at the stage of opposition between thought and life, reason and nature. On the contrary, both terms are made over to come to higher unity. Raw nature, the life of impulse, is made over, cultivated, so as to reflect the higher aspirations of man, to be an expression of reason. And reason, on its side, ceases to identify itself narrowly with a supposedly higher self fighting to hold nature at bay. On the contrary, it sees that nature itself is part of a rational plan, that division had to be in order to prepare and cultivate man for a higher union. The rational subject identifies himself with this larger reason, the rational plan underlying the whole, and as such no longer sees himself as opposed to a nature which has itself been made over to be an apt expression of rationality.

Human history thus does not end with division. It moves beyond it to a still higher cultural form, in which our nature, that is, our individual and collective life in interchange with our surroundings, expresses a larger rational plan than that of the autonomous individual; and to a still higher mode of consciousness in which we come to see this larger plan and identify with it. Hegel reserves the term ‘reason’ (Vernunft) for this higher mode, and calls the vision of things as divided or opposed ‘understanding’ (Verstand).

This unity is very different from the undifferentiated one of the beginning. It is ‘mediated’; it preserves the consciousness of division which was a necessary stage in the cultivation of nature and the development of reason. It is fully conscious, and (supposedly) quintessentially rational.

Thus the human subject models Hegel’s thesis of the relation of identity and opposition. Not only is he both identical and opposed to his essential embodiment; but this dual relation can be expressed in a temporal pattern: out of original identity, opposition necessarily grows; and this opposition itself leads to a higher unity, which is founded on a recognition of the inevitability and rational necessity of this opposition.

3
But how does this theory of man justify such startling formulae as the ‘identity of identity and non-identity’? Even if we grant that Hegel’s theory of the subject gives us insight into an inescapable conflict in man, which we might be tempted to call a ‘contradiction’, how does this justify talking about a link between identity and opposition tout court?

The answer is that this theory of the subject applies not only to man, but to cosmic spirit, or Geist as well. And indeed, we already saw at the end of the last section that the resolution of opposition in man required that we refer beyond him to a larger rational plan, which is that of Geist.

We saw that for Hegel, the absolute is subject. That which underlies and manifests itself in all reality, what for Spinoza was ‘substance’, and came for those inspired by the Sturm und Drang to be seen as a divine life flowing through everything, Hegel understood as spirit. But spirit or subjectivity is necessarily embodied. Hence Geist or God cannot exist separately from the universe which he sustains and in which he manifests himself. On the contrary this universe is his embodiment, without which he would not be, any more than I would be without mine. We can already see why Hegel had to suffer accusations of Spinozism or pantheism. And in this he was in the company of many other thinkers of the period who had been influenced by the Sturm und Drang or Romantic thought. In order to appreciate his reply, we have to examine more closely his conception of Geist, which was indeed peculiar to him.

We saw that there are two models of embodiment which come together in the expressivist theory of the subject on which Hegel built. One was the Aristotelian-derived notion of a life-form which can only be in a living body. The other is that of the expression of thought which requires a medium. They come together in the notion of a mode of life which properly expresses what I am as a man, or more appropriately from an expressivist point of view, as this man, member of this community. The mode of living is both a way of carrying out the necessary functions of life, nourishment, reproduction, and so on, and also a cultural expression which reveals and determines what we are, our ‘identity’. The marriage relation of a couple, the mode of economic production of a society, can – from an expressivist point of view, must – be seen in these two dimensions. They are modes of interchange which sustain life and reproduction. But they also incorporate definitions of role, of value, of aspiration, success and failure, fairness, and so on. And there could not be anything which we would recognize as a human marriage, or mode of production, which did not incorporate such definitions. Or to put it another way, these relations would be impossible without language.

But although these two dimensions of embodiment are necessary to understand man, they do not overlap totally. There are aspects of man which we must understand simply as life-function, and not cultural expression, his digestion for instance; and we can argue, at any rate, that there are cultural expressions which can be understood without relating them to life-functions (though Marxists and Freudians would disagree). And these have to be set alongside marriage customs or modes of production which must be understood as both.

With Geist, however, the two coincide perfectly. The universe is the embodiment of the totality of the life-functions’ of God, that is, the conditions of his existence. And it also is throughout an expression of God, that is, something posited by God in order to manifest what he is. The universe must therefore both be grasped as something analogous to a life-form, hence understood by the Aristotelian-derived category of ‘internal teleology’; and be read as something analogous to a text in which God says what he is.

This perfect coincidence in God of life and expression is what marks him off as infinite spirit from ourselves as finite spirits. We must see the universe as the conditions of existence of God, and also as posited as such. God can be thought of as positing the conditions of his own existence. In this sense the universe can be looked at as if it were designed, as long as we take care to set aside the image of a designer who could exist separately from his creation. The universe has, we might say, a necessary structure. Before we go on to look at this difficult notion of a designed universe without an independent designer, let us see the shape of this necessary structure.

If the universe is posited as the conditions of existence of God or Geist, then we can deduce its general structure from the nature of Geist. Now Geist, or subjectivity, as we saw, is to be understood teleologically as tending to realize reason and freedom and self-consciousness, or rational self-awareness in freedom. We can see how these three terms are linked together in an expressivist theory of the subject. Rational self-awareness is rational awareness of a self which has been expressed in life and thus made determinate. The fullness of self-awareness is reached when this expression is recognized as adequate to the self. If it is not, if it is seen as truncated or distorted and requiring further change, then the self-awareness is not complete, however lucid the perception of inadequacy, for on the expressivist view, what we really are is not known in advance of its expression. The truncated being can only go on to a fuller expression in order then to recognize what he really is.

But freedom, on the expressivist view, is the condition in which the self is adequately expressed. Hence full self-awareness is impossible without freedom. If we add to this the notion that self-awareness is of the essence of the subject, then the converse proposition is also true: freedom (that is, full self-expression) is impossible without self-awareness. Now Hegel would add to this common basis of expressivist theory, the thesis that the essence of subjectivity is rational self-awareness, that self-consciousness must be in the clear medium of conceptual thought and not in cloudy intuition or ineffable vision. Hence rationality, too, is for him a condition of integral expression or freedom, and reciprocally.

Now let us transfer this from man onto Geist, and see what it shows us about the necessary structures of the world. If Geist as subject is to come to rational self-awareness in freedom, then the universe must contain, first, finite spirits. Geist must be embodied. But bodily reality is external reality, it is partes extra partes, extended in space and time. Hence for consciousness to be it must be located, it must be somewhere, sometime. But if a consciousness is somewhere, sometime, it is not somewhere else, sometime else. It thus has a limit between itself and what is not itself. It is finite.

We can thus show the necessity of finite spirit from the requirement that Geist be embodied, and from the nature of embodiment in external, spatio-temporal reality. But there is also another argument, which Hegel frequently employs, from the requirements of consciousness itself. Hegel took over the notion from Kant and Fichte that consciousness is necessarily bi-polar, i.e., that it requires the distinction of subject and object. This plays an important role in Kant’s transcendental deduction, which in one form turns on the requirement of objectivity, that is, that there be a distinction between phenomena which are bound together merely in my experience and those which are bound together universally and necessarily. The extraordinary achievement of Kant’s first Critique is to rehabilitate this distinction between subjective and objective within experience considered as distinct from things in themselves. This necessity of an objective pole to experience also underlies Kant’s refutation of idealism.

Fichte took up the same principle. The Ego posits the non-Ego because this is the condition of consciousness. Hegel makes this principle his own, and it is part of his general espousal of the view that rational awareness requires separation. Consciousness is only possible when the subject is set over against an object. But to be set over against an object is to be limited by something other, and hence to be finite. It follows that if cosmic spirit is to attain full awareness, it can only be through vehicles which are finite spirits. Hence finite, limited subjects are necessary. The notion of a cosmic spirit which would be aware of itself directly, without the opposition to an object which is the predicament of finite subjects, is incoherent. The life of such a spirit would at best be one of dull self-feeling, there would be nothing in it which merited the name ‘consciousness’, much less ‘rational awareness’. A fitting pantheist vision for the Romantic enthusiasts of intuition, but nothing to do with Hegel’s Geist.

Geist is thus necessarily embodied in finite spirits. This is the same in the context of this argument as the thesis that Geist returns to himself out of opposition and division; or that his self-consciousness incorporates consciousness. And Hegel frequently does use the word ‘consciousness’ to refer to this bi-polar dimension in the life of Geist.7 And he will reject any theory of man which tries to avoid this bi-polarity, any theory of consciousness as culminating in self-coincidence.8

Thus Geist must have a vehicle in finite spirit. This is the only kind of vehicle it can have. Moreover, there cannot be only one such. For Geist cannot be confined to the particular place and time of any one finite spirit. It has to compensate for its necessary localization, as it were, by living through many finite spirits.

Geist must thus embody itself in finite beings, in certain parcels of the universe. And these must be such that they can embody spirit. They must be living beings, for only living beings are capable of expressive activity, of deploying an external medium, of sound, gesture, marks, or whatever, in which meaning can be expressed; and only beings capable of expressive activity can embody spirit. Hence we can see that if Geist is to be, the universe must contain rational animals, ourselves.

There are finite spirits, who must be living beings, hence finite living beings. Finite living beings are in interchange with a world outside them. Thus the universe must also contain a plurality of kinds of living things, as well as inanimate nature. Other species and inanimate nature are necessary as the background and foundation on which finite life can exist. But one can perhaps discern another argument in Hegel in favour of the necessary existence of many species and inanimate nature. Geist to be embodied requires, as we saw, externality, that is, extension in space and time; life; and conscious life. All of these, of course, exist in man. But a universe in which only finite conscious spirits existed, and lived purely in interchange with each other, would not be anything like as rich and varied as one in which life also existed on its own without consciousness, and externality was there on its own without both in the form of inanimate nature. The richest universe is one in which all these levels (and others, which Hegel distinguishes within inanimate nature in his philosophy of nature) exist on their own.

It may seem odd to see this Leibnizian principle, that the real world be the richest possible, recur in Hegel. But in fact it can be grounded on his own position. The universe, as we saw, is at once the embodiment, i.e., realization of the conditions of existence of Geist, and its expression, a statement of what Geist is. In this latter respect, there is no doubt about the superiority of a world in which the differences are maximally deployed. It is fuller, clearer as a statement.9

The general structure of the universe (about which only the barest indications have been given here, the detail is worked out in the philosophies of nature and spirit) is thus determined by virtue of its being the embodiment and expression of Geist. It includes a hierarchy of beings from the lowest inanimate forms through various kinds of living species to man. And then, of course, for the realization of Geist, man has to develop, as we saw in the last section. So that there is also a hierarchy of cultural forms and modes of consciousness which succeed each other in time and make up human history. The articulation of the universe in space and time can be deduced from the requirements of a cosmic spirit which must be embodied and expressed in it. Even the different stages of human history can be derived as necessary, from the nature of man’s starting point in raw, uncultivated existence and the consummation he is heading towards.10

What is it then for Geist to come to rational self-awareness in freedom? If the structure of the universe is as it is in order to be the embodiment/expression of Geist, then Geist comes to self-awareness when this is recognized. Of course, this can only be recognized by ourselves, finite spirits, for we are the only vehicles of awareness. But in recognizing that this is the structure of things we at the same time shift the centre of gravity of our own identity. We see that what is most fundamental about us is that we are vehicles of Geist. Hence in achieving full insight our science of the universe is transformed; from being knowledge that we as finite spirits have about a world which is other than us it becomes the self-knowledge of universal spirit of which we are the vehicles.

And in coming to full self-awareness, Geist, has also come to its fullest self-expression, hence freedom. It has shaped its vehicle to a perfect expression of itself. And since the essence of that vehicle, man, is to be the vehicle of Geist, he too is and knows himself as fully self-expressed, i.e., free.

But the self-expression and -awareness of Geistis something infinitely higher than our own. When man comes to full awareness of his perfect self-expression, he recognizes in this something which is ultimately given. Human nature, what is common to all men, is there as a basis or determinable which circumscribes the field for every man’s original creation. And even my original creations, the things in my life that seem to express me as against man in general, even these seem to come to me as inspiration which I cannot fully fathom much less control. That is why, as we saw, not all of human life can be seen as expression; but much of what we do and what goes on in us must be understood purely in terms of our life-form, just as we do with animals with no power of expression. And even our expressive activity is conditioned by this life-form.

With Geist it is meant to be different. Its whole embodiment is supposed to be an expression of it as well. The universe, as this embodiment, is thought to be posited by Geist. Geist posits its own embodiment. Hence there can be nothing merely given. I as a human being have the vocation of realizing a nature which is given: and even if I am called on to be original, to realize myself in the way uniquely suited to myself, nevertheless this scope for originality is itself given as an integral part of human nature, as are those unique features of me on which my originality builds. Freedom for man thus means the free realization of a vocation which is largely given. But Geist should be free in a radical sense. What it realizes and recognizes as having been realized is not given, but determined by itself.

Hegel’s Geist thus seems to be the original existentialist, choosing his own nature in radical freedom from anything merely given. And in fact, Hegel laid the conceptual groundwork for all the modern views called ‘existentialist’, from Kierkegaard to Sartre. But Hegel himself was no existentialist. On the contrary, it is hard to see how Hegel’s Geist could ever have begun, how he ever could have chosen one world rather than another, if we were to understand his radical freedom in the existentialist sense. For he would not start with a situation as does the human agent.

But for Hegel the radical freedom of Geist is not incompatible with a necessary structure of things; on the contrary, the two notions are intrinsically linked. Geist in positing the world is bound by rational necessity, the necessary structure of things if Geist is to be. But this is no limit on his freedom. For Geist as subjectivity is quintessentially reason. And reason is most fully realized when one follows, in thought and action, the line of rational, i.e., conceptual necessity. If one had a line of action which was grounded entirely on rational, conceptual necessity, without reposing on any merely given premises, then we would have a pure expression of subjectivity as reason, one in which spirit would recognize itself as expressed, and hence free, in a total, unadulterated way; something immeasurably greater than the freedom of finite spirits. This is the freedom of Geist, which posits a world as its own essential embodiment according to rational necessity.

But there seems to be something amiss here. Now can there be a line of action which is founded entirely on rational necessity? Surely there must be some goal which is taken as the starting point, even if everything that is done is determined by strict reasoning from this basic aim. For otherwise how can reasoning by itself come to any conclusion as to what action to take? But then is this basic goal not simply given?

The answer is, in a sense, yes. But not in a sense which need negate the radical freedom of Geist. For Geist can be thought to have as its basic aim simply that spirit, or rational subjectivity, be; and the rest can be thought to follow of necessity. If the principle of embodiment, which has so far just been stated here without argument, could be shown to be necessarily true; if the arguments which I briefly sketched above from the principle of embodiment to the existence of finite spirits, living things, inanimate nature, etc., hold; then the design of the universe could be shown to flow of necessity from the single basic goal: that rational subjectivity be. We could show in other words, that if a subjectivity which knows itself rationally, i.e., in conceptual consciousness, is to be, then all this is necessary.

But then the only input into this skein of rational necessity would be the goal, let rational subjectivity be. Once this ‘decision’ is taken, the rest flows of itself. But it cannot be thought of as a limitation on the freedom of Geist that this ‘decision’ is preformed. That subjectivity should be is not a limit on its freedom, but the very basis of it; and that it should be rational, i.e., expressed in conceptual consciousness, is thought by Hegel to belong to the very essence of subjectivity. For what do we mean by subjectivity if we do not include consciousness, self-consciousness and the power to act knowingly? But consciousness, knowledge, can only reach completion in conceptual thought.

Hence once we start with the basic goal, that rational subjectivity be, which is no limit on the freedom of Geist, the fact that from then on Geist’s ‘activity’ in positing the world follows entirely the line of rational necessity is not a restriction on his freedom. Quite the contrary, it is just that which makes him radically free, in an unlimited, i.e., infinite, way. Because as a rational subjectivity he is following nothing but his own essence in following rational necessity. There is no outside element, no given which determines him. If the basic structure of the world were shown to be contingent,11 then something else other than rational necessity, that is, the very essence of rational subjectivity, would have determined it to be A rather than B. But then it would not be integrally an expression of the essence of this subjectivity and he would not be infinitely free.

But because everything that is flows by rational necessity out of the first ‘decision’, we cannot really say that Geist is faced with any givens. We can see this by contrasting his lot once more with ours. Man has a nature which is given; it is a fact about the world, along with a great number of others, that we have sexual desire all the time and not periodically like animals, that we can only live within certain temperature ranges, etc. Freedom for us involves assuming this nature and innovating within the range of originality it allows. But for Geist nothing is given in this sense, i.e., as a brute fact. The only starting point is the requirement that subjectivity be; and the only ‘positive’ content attached to this subjectivity is that of rationality, and this belongs to its very essence.

For the rest, the whole structure of the world as it exists in fact is generated from this requirement by rational necessity.

We must avoid a misunderstanding which can all too easily arise here. Hegel is not saying that everything that exists and happens comes of necessity. He means to argue that the basic structure of things, the chain of levels of beings, the general shape of world history: these are manifestations of necessity. But within this structure, there is not only room for contingency, but contingency, as it were, necessarily exists. For we have seen that all levels of being exist independently; but one of the distinguishing marks of the lower levels is that they only imperfectly manifest the necessity underlying things, they show it only in a rough external way; there is much in them which is purely contingent. So that many of the properties of matter, e.g. the exact number of species of parrot, cannot be deduced from the concept of the world. (WL, II, 462).12 Only in the higher realizations of human culture is necessity fully manifest and all manifestation a reflection of necessity.

But this play of interstitial contingency, as it were, does not introduce an element of the simply given, which Geist has not derived from himself. On the contrary, contingency and its place in the universe is itself derived by necessity from the requirements of absolute subjectivity.

4

What is the nature of this rational necessity? Earlier, I used the expression ‘conceptual’ as equivalent to ‘rational’ in talking of ‘conceptual consciousness’ or ‘necessity’. This equivalence is important in Hegel but it could easily lead to misunderstanding in the context of contemporary anglo-saxon philosophy. We have developed a notion of conceptual necessity from empiricist and positivist roots, which is by no means the only conception current in English philosophy today – it may even be receding – but it is well-known enough to mislead. This is the notion of conceptual necessity as opposed to contingent, causal necessity, and as reposing on the meanings of words. Certain statements were necessary and others contradictory because they combined words in such a way that they could not but be true or could not but be false in virtue of their meaning. Analytic statements were thought to be true statements of this type; but for those who have doubts about analyticity, logical truths (e.g. ‘horses are horses’) could stand as examples.

The idea was that these necessary truths held in virtue of the meanings of words as opposed to facts about the world. The meaning of a word was the semantic and syntactical force attributed to a sign. This could of course be changed, and with certain changes, some formerly necessary truths would cease to hold. ‘Bachelors are unmarried’ holds now, but not if we decided to use the word ‘bachelor’ to designate people who were not married in church, even though they were civilly married. In all this, nothing need have changed in the world.

This was of course not Hegel’s idea of conceptual necessity. We can see this if we look for example at the argument described above, where the aim was to show that such and such structural conditions were necessary for embodied Geist, and see what parallels will illuminate it. Like many arguments it can of course be set up in deductive form, but this does not reveal its real structure. This is rather akin to Kant’s transcendental deduction. Like Kant, we start with a given – in Kant’s case, experience; here, the existence of Geist- and argue back to its necessary conditions. But as with Kant’s transcendental arguments the necessary conditions are not derived by simple deduction from the terms used in the starting point; nor of course by examining causal relations.

Thus Kant starts from the fact of experience, moves then to the point that we could not have experience of the world unless we had a place for the distinction between what is objectively so and what is only so for us; and then goes on to show how we could not have this distinction unless the categories hold. But the steps of this argument are neither simply deductive nor based on causal reasoning. That experience requires the distinction ‘objectively/for us’ is not something we derive from the concept of experience, as we derive ‘unmarried’ from ‘bachelor’. The derivation is not analytic in Kant’s sense. Of course we could decide that we would take ‘experience’ as incorporating this in its meaning, and turn this argument into an analytic derivation. But this would be to miss the important point about it: that the necessity doesn’t repose on the analytic relation, but on something else: that we are here at a conceptual limit, such that we could not form a coherent notion of experience which did not incorporate this distinction. The whole structure of experience as by a subject and of something would collapse. This is fundamentally unlike the ‘bachelor, therefore unmarried’ case, in that we could tamper with our concept of bachelor, as we saw above, so that the inference would fail. But the transcendental argument claims that no-one can tamper with ‘experience’ in the relevant way, and go on saying something coherent.

Hegel’s argument of the kind we described above, e.g., that Geist cannot be without finite spirits, is something of this type. A crucial step here is that Geist embodied must be placed somewhere, and hence limited, finite. But this is not derived analytically from ‘embodied’. On the contrary it appeals to another kind of conceptual limit whereby we could make no coherent sense of ‘embodied but nowhere in particular’.

And yet in both these cases, it is not out of order to speak of ‘conceptual necessity’. For it is clear that we are not dealing here with causal impossibilities, but with a conceptual limit. To speak of ‘conceptual’ necessity stresses this.

Now a conceptual limit of this kind tells us about more than the meanings of terms; it also tells us about the structure of things. Though just what it says is very much open to dispute. It is possible to argue like Kant that it tells us something about the limits of our minds. But Hegel who holds that the world is posited by Geist according to rational necessity, i.e., necessity dictated by such conceptual limits, sees these rather as tracing the lineaments of the universe. A world constructed according to conceptual necessity is only adequately revealed in statements of conceptual necessity. In Hegel’s terms, the structure of things is to be deduced from the Concept.13

If the world is posited out of conceptual necessity, and is only adequately understood in conceptually necessary thought, then the complete self-understanding of Geist, which is the same as our fully adequate understanding of the world, must be a vision of conceptual necessity, a kind of seamless garment of rationality.

Now this might be thought impossible, even by those who have followed us this far. Our vision of the world cannot just be one of rational necessity. For we saw that there had to be a starting point in the goal, that rational subjectivity be; and while this may involve no mitigation of the infinite freedom of Geist, it surely must be seen as a basic premise, not itself established by reasoning, in our final vision of things.

But this is not how Hegel sees it. In the vision which Geist has of himself there is no absolute starting point; rather there is a circle. Thus we do not just assume as a starting point that Geist is to be, and derive the structure of the world from this. We have also to prove this proposition. And if we reflect a minute, we can see that this is necessary from more than one point of view. It is not just a matter of attaining to a seamless garment of necessity, but of being able to prove that our thesis is valid.

For it is not enough to show that if Geist is to be, the world must have the design which it in fact has, if we want to conclude that this world is posited by Geist as its embodiment. The fact that things are arranged as if by design is never enough to prove a designer and hence a designing. The best we could arrive at here would be high probability, and we are concerned with necessity. What more is needed is that we are able in examining this world to show that it is in fact posited by Geist.

This Hegel claims to do; indeed, it is the central thread of his major works. He claims to show that when we examine the furniture of the world, we must see that it cannot be except as an emanation from Geist. And we show this by dialectical argument. We come to see that the things in the world cannot exist on their own because they are contradictory. Hence we can only understand them as part of a greater or deeper reality on which they lean, or of which they are parts or aspects. The dialectic goes through several stages as we climb successively beyond the unsatisfactory notions of what this self-subsistent or absolute reality could be; until we come to the only satisfactory conception of it as Geist, a spiritual reality which perpetually posits the world as its necessary embodiment, and perpetually negates it as well in order to return to itself.

We shall examine dialectical argument below. For the moment it might be helpful to say this, that the argument from contradiction takes hold because of some inner complexity in the reality concerned, so that there can be a conflict between what it is and what it is meant to be. Part of the great ingenuity of Hegel’s argument will be to find this kind of complexity in any and every starting point, no matter how apparently simple and impoverished. We shall see a number of examples later on, but we have already seen this kind of conflict in the Hegelian view of the subject, which is in opposition or ‘contradiction’ with himself because the conditions of his existence clash with his telos.

Thus starting from finite reality, Hegel claims to be able to demonstrate the existence of a cosmic spirit who posits the world according to rational necessity. This, if it stuck, would certainly plug the gap in his proof in that we would no longer be relying on a probabilistic ‘argument from design’. But would it bring us any closer to a vision of things based throughout on rational necessity? Surely, we have just displaced our underived starting point. From the existence of Geist, which posits the world in order to be, we have moved it back to the existence of some finite thing from which we can come to Geist by dialectical argument. But we still have to take this finite thing as given in order to get things started.

But on Hegel’s view this starting point is not an ultimate one either. For as we saw, the existence of this finite reality can itself be demonstrated. Does this mean that in proof we are forced to an endless regress? This would certainly not meet our goal of a totally rational vision, because although there is nowhere we would have to stop, we would have to stop somewhere with an underived premise.

But in fact we avoid the endless regress by a circle. We show in our ascending dialectic that finite reality can only be as an emanation of Giest, hence that given finite reality, self-positing Geist must be. But then we can also demonstrate, as outlined above, that a self-positing Geist, that is a cosmic spirit who lays down the conditions of his own existence, must posit the structure of finite things we know. In these two movements, ascending and descending (which are in fact interwoven in Hegel’s exposition), our argument returns to its starting point. The existence of finite reality which originally we just took as given is now shown to be necessary. Originally just a datum, it is now swept up in the circle of necessity.

But is this any solution? we might ask. Is not a circle the paradigm of invalid argument? But this reaction is misplaced. The Hegelian circle of necessity has nothing to do with circular argument. We speak of arguing in a circle when conclusions appear in the premisses which are essential to derive them. The circle is vicious because the point of the argument is to establish a conclusion by showing it follows from something which is easier to establish directly, or which is already known. Thus when we find that the conclusion only follows if we supplement the premiss with the conclusion itself, we see that the whole enterprise has gone astray, for we are no nearer to establishing this conclusion via its links with another, more accessible truth.

Now Hegel’s arguments are not circular in this way; or if they are it is not at all because of the Hegelian circle of argument. The necessity of self-positing Geist follows from the existence of finite things in the dialectic without our having to assume Geist, or at least purports to do so. And the necessity of finite things flows from the requirements of Geist without our assuming finitude. What we have might rather be seen as two non-circular series of arguments which establish each other’s starting point, or take in each other’s washing.

But in fact even this is not quite right. For the two series of arguments are not really similar and the circle does not precisely return to its starting point. We start the ascending dialectic from a finite reality. We close the circle by showing that this finite reality necessarily exists. ‘Necessity’ has a different meaning in the two phases.

In the ascending dialectic we are dealing with a necessity of inference. If finite things exist, then they are dependent on and posited by Geist. This is a hypothetical proposition. Symmetrical to this we might propound another hypothetical proposition to the effect that if cosmic subjectivity is to be, then the furniture of the world must be of a certain sort. But the Hegelian circle involves more than just putting these two together.

For what Hegel claims to show in the ascending movement is not just that granted finite existence, there must be Geist. He will show that this finite existence cannot be except as posited by cosmic spirit – a cosmic spirit whose nature is to posit its own essential embodiment. Hence the ascending movement shows us that finite reality is posited by a subject according to a necessary plan. What I have called the descending movement spells out this plan, the full conditions of cosmic spirit, which are thus instantiated in the world. The outcome of the whole circle is that finite reality is shown to be not just contingently given, but to be there in fulfilment of a plan, whose articulations are determined by rational necessity.

But now the notion of necessity has changed. We are not just dealing with a necessity of inference: if A, then B. In saying that what exists, exists in virtue of a rationally necessary plan, we are ascribing necessary existence to it. The necessity with which Hegel’s argument concludes concerns the ground of existence of things. It is ontological necessity.

The very concept of ontological necessity may be attacked as incoherent, as Kant did in the Transcendental Dialectic. A final judgement on this would have to await our study of Hegel’s detailed argument, particularly in the Logic. But there is no doubt that this concept is central to Hegel’s conclusion. Hence the end of the Hegelian circle contains more than its starting point. We are not just dealing with two hypothetical arguments symmetrically joined. Rather we return and pick up a starting point initially just given and recuperate it for (ontological) necessity.

Our ascending movement thus starts with a postulate and proceeds by necessary inference. But what it infers to is ontological necessity, the proposition that everything which exists is posited by Geist according to a formula of rational necessity. The circle is thus not a single stream of inferences. Rather, it involves a reversal of starting point. We begin with the ascending movement which is a movement of discovery. Our starting point is finite existence which is first in the order of discovery. But what we reveal is a pervasive ontological necessity, and this shows that our original starting point is really secondary. Finite reality is itself posited by Geist, God, the Absolute. This is the real starting point in the order of being.

Hence we get beyond the problem of a contingent or merely given starting point by rising above it to a vision of ontological necessity which englobes it. We rise to a vision of seamless necessity, and from this vantage point we see that our original starting point, along with everything which is, is part of the same web. So that nothing is left outside, nothing is merely given; and Geist as wholly self-positing is truly free, truly infinite, in an absolute sense that has no parallel with finite spirits.

5
What kind of a notion is it, this Hegelian idea of a self-positing God? We saw this arise inescapably from our application of the Hegelian (and ultimately expressivist) idea of the subject to God: the subject who is necessarily embodied and whose embodiment is both the condition of his existence and the expression of what he is. With God as we saw, the expression is coterminous with the conditions of existence, unlike man, and what is expressed is something totally determined out of God as subject, no part of it is just given.

This idea of God is very hard to grasp and state coherently – if, indeed, it ultimately is coherent – because it cannot fit certain readily available categories in which we think of God and the world. Thus there are two clearly-defined and relatively comprehensible views which could be mistaken for Hegel’s.

The first, which we could call theism, looks on the world as created by a God who is separate and independent of the universe. This makes the idea readily understandable that the world is to be seen as designed, as having a structure dictated by purpose. But this cannot be accepted by Hegel, for it violates the principle of embodiment. A God who could exist without the world, without any external embodiment is an impossibility.

Thus although Hegel takes up the notion of creation, as he takes up all Christian dogmas, he re-interprets it, and speaks of the creation as necessary. To say the world was created by God is to say that it exists necessarily so that Geist can be. It is to say the same thing as that Geist posits a world, and just what this means we shall try to make a little less obscure below. But what it cannot mean is what it means for orthodox theism, that God created the world freely, having no need to do so. Or as he put it in his notes for the lectures on the philosophy of religion ‘Without the world God is not God.’ (B Rel 148.)14

The other scheme by which we might try to understand what Hegel is saying is one we can call naturalist. Here we abandon all talk of creation, however interpreted. We think of the world as existing as a matter of fact, but having such properties that beings evolve on it which are vehicles of rational life, and moreover who come to see themselves as vehicles of a rational life which is larger than themselves, but rather that of the whole. This would avoid all danger of thinking of this rational life, or spirit of the whole, as a God separate from the world. But here too, we have a scheme unacceptable to Hegel, for the existence of such a universe would be ultimately a brute fact. True, it would happen to secrete a rational consciousness which could be called in some sense that of the whole (as for instance if the workings of the human mind reflected not just what is peculiar to man but also what he has in common with all other life, or even with all other beings – an idea which Freud, e.g., seems to have flirted with at one point). But this would be contingent good fortune. The universe would not be there in order to embody this rational consciousness. In recognizing the structure of things, this global mind would not be recognizing his own doing, something which was there in order to conform to rational necessity, and hence to his own nature as rational subject; rather he would be recognizing a given, even as we finite minds do when we contemplate our own nature. He would thus not be radically free and unconditioned. We could not speak of him as the Absolute.

Hegel can accept neither of these views. What he needs is some combination of the features of both. Like the theist view, he wants to see the world as designed, as existing in order to fulfil a certain prospectus, the requirements of embodiment for Geist. But like the naturalists, he cannot allow a God who could design this world from the outside, who could exist before and independently of the world. His idea is therefore that of a God who eternally makes the conditions of his own existence. This is what I have been trying to express, following frequent use by Hegel, with the term ‘posit (setzen). This use of the term came in fact from Fichte, who attributed something like the same self-creation of necessary conditions to the ego.

In fact, following this parallel with Fichte, it might be best to express Hegel’s idea in this way. Both of the schemes we have compared to Hegel’s view repose ultimately on existential propositions: some basic reality exists, and from this everything else can be explained. In one case this is God, in the other, a world with certain features. But what is fundamental in Hegel’s conception is not the existence of some reality, but rather a requirement, that Geist be. Consequently while both the other views ultimately reach ground in contingency, that of the existence of the world, or of the existence of God, or of his decision to create the world, Hegel’s is meant to be grounded in thorough-going necessity. Geist not only is, but he has to be, and the conditions of his existence are dictated by this necessity.

There is something in Hegel’s philosophy which is irresistibly reminiscent of Baron Münchhausen. The baron, it will be remembered, after falling from his horse in a swamp, extricated himself by seizing his own hair and heaving himself back on his horse. Hegel’s God is a Münchhausen God; but it is hard to say in this difficult domain whether his exploits should be treated with the same scepticism as those of the baron.

In any case, it is clear that Hegel is neither a theist in the ordinary sense, nor an atheist. Whatever the sincerity of his claims to be an orthodox Lutheran, it is clear that Hegel only accepted a Christianity which had been systematically reinterpreted to be a vehicle of his own philosophy. We will trace this in a later chapter. It is little wonder, though, that he was much misunderstood (or perhaps too well understood) in his time, and accused frequently of heterodox views; or that some of his followers could reinterpret him in the direction of orthodox theism. Hegel’s position was in a sense on a narrow crest between theism and some form of naturalism or pantheism. The atmosphere was so rarified on top that it was easy to fall off, and remains so.

But how about the accusation of pantheism? This is neither a theist nor an atheist position, and seems at first sight to fit him rather well. Of course, Hegel stoutly denied the charge; cynics might attribute this to the bad effects on his employment prospects if it stuck, even as cynics have explained his protestations of Lutheranism by the impossibility of holding the chair in Berlin otherwise. But in both cases, they fail to do him justice. Hegel did use the term ‘pantheist’, to apply to a position which indiscriminately attributed divinity to finite things. In this sense Hegel was not a pantheist. The world isn’t divine for him, nor is any part of it. God is rather the subject of the rational necessity which manifests itself in the world.

What distinguished Hegel’s position from pantheism in his own mind was the rational necessity which, it is true, could not exist without the world as the ensemble of finite things, but which was in this sense superior to the world, that it determined its structure according to its own exigencies. Hegel’s Geist is thus anything but a world soul, whose nature would be given just as ours is, however great and awe-inspiring. And it is this same insistence on rational necessity which distinguishes his view from that of certain romantics, whose notion of an unfathomable cosmic spirit, or an endless process of creation resembles that of a rationally impenetrable world-soul.

Hegel’s theory has also been called by some ‘panentheist’ or ‘emanationist’, and likened in this regard to that of Plotinus. There certainly are affinities. And Hegel like the Greeks seems to be committed to something like an eternal universe, once we take seriously his reinterpretation of the dogma of creation. But here too there is no exact parallel. On an emanationist view, finite things arise from a falling away from the One. They emanate from him, perhaps inescapably, as in the famous image the sun’s rays from the sun. But they in turn play no essential role in his life, they are not essential to the One as he is to them. For Hegel, however, finitude is a condition of the existence of infinite life. The relationship is not something which could have been thought out before the development of the expressivist theory. It has affinities with very ancient doctrines, but it is a thoroughly modern idea.

6

But how does this help us understand the general claims about the identity of identity and difference which Hegel makes? We started to examine Hegel’s notion of the subject, in order to clarify this. And we got some indication of what is meant when we saw that the human subject was prey to an inner conflict, in which the conditions of his existence were at odds with his essential goal. And we saw briefly how this might be resolved through a shift to a higher perspective in which man sees himself as vehicle of Geist and not simply as finite spirit.

Now the same basic conflict affects the absolute subject. It too has conditions of existence which are at odds with its telos. For it must be embodied in external, finite realities, finite spirits living in a world of finite, material things. And yet its life is infinite and unbounded. Its vehicle is a finite spirit which at first has only the dimmest consciousness of himself and faces a world which is anything but immediately transparent, whose rational structure is deeply hidden. And yet its telos is clear rational knowledge of the rationally necessary. It is the unity of spirit and matter, thought and extension; and yet in the world thinking beings face external reality as something other.

Like finite subject, the absolute subject must go through a cycle, a drama, in which it suffers division in order to return to unity. It undergoes inner opposition, in order to overcome it, and rise through its vehicles to a consciousness of itself as rational necessity. And this drama is not another parallel story to the drama of opposition and reconciliation in man. It is the same one seen from a different and wider perspective. For man is the vehicle of Geist’s spiritual life.

The two are related in this way, that the greatest opposition in the cosmic subject is the point of departure from which the opposition grows in man. And this opposition grows in man as he strives, albeit without clear knowledge of what he is doing, to overcome this primary opposition of subject and world. The primary opposition, the point of greatest opposition for Geist is its being embodied in a world at odds with itself where nothing has yet been done to cancel this opposition. This is the point which is at the beginning as far as men are concerned, where they are still sunk in nature, unconscious of their vocation, as far as possible from a true understanding of spirit. This is the point of primitive unity for man. But in order to play their role in overcoming the opposition of the world to Geist, men have to school themselves, become beings capable of reason, break away from a life sunk in nature and dominated by impulse, go beyond their immediate parochial perspectives to that of reason. And in so doing they divide within themselves, oppose spirit to nature in their own lives. The reconciliation comes for both when men rise further beyond this standpoint of opposition, and see the greater rational necessity and their part in it. At that point they are beyond the opposition of spirit and nature because they see how each is necessary for the other, how both spring from the same rational necessity, which determines both their opposition, and then their reconciliation in the recognition of this underlying necessity.

But now we have seen that the absolute, what is at the foundation of everything, is Geist, or subject, and this is not just a matter of fact, e.g., that the world is so made that there is a single current of life in it which we can call a world-soul. Rather it is so in virtue of rational necessity. Hence the dialectic of identity and opposition in subjectivity is not of local interest. On Hegel’s scheme, it must be of ontological import. If the absolute is subject, and everything that is can only be in being related to this subject, then everything is caught up in the interplay of identity and opposition which makes up the life of this subject. But then in this case, we would not be twisting words or engaging in hyperbole, if we spoke of a necessary relation of identity and opposition tout court.

Let us see how this and other Hegelian terms find general application in the context of this view of the world.

The Absolute, what is ultimately real, or what is at the foundation of everything, is subject. And the cosmic subject is such that he is both identical and non-identical to the world. There is identity in that Geist cannot exist without the world; and yet also opposition, for the world as externality represents a dispersal, an unconsciousness which Geist has to overcome to be itself, to fulfil its goal as self-conscious reason.

The life of the absolute subject is essentially a process, a movement, in which it posits its own conditions of existence, and then overcomes the opposition of these same conditions to realize its goal of self-knowledge. Or as Hegel puts it in the Preface to the PhG: ‘the living substance is […] Subject […] only in so far as it is the movement of positing itself [Bewegung des Sichselbstsetzens], or the mediation between a self and its development into something different [Vermittlung des Sichanderswerdens mit sich selbst]’ (PhG, 20).15

Thus Geist cannot exist simply, Hegel would say ‘immediately’. It can exist only by overcoming its opposite. It can exist only by negating its own negation. This is the point Hegel makes in the passage in the preface to the PhG immediately after the one just quoted, where he says that the Absolute is essentially Result, ‘that it is only in the end what it is in truth’.16 Geist is something which essentially comes to be out of a process of self-loss and return.

But Geist is at the root of everything, and hence mediation becomes a cosmic principle. What can claim to exist immediately is only matter, that is, pure externality. But this shows itself on examination to be incapable of separate existence; taken on its own, it is contradictory and can thus only exist as part of the whole which is the embodiment of Geist.

In Hegel’s usage, we can speak of something as ‘immediate’ (unmittelbar) when it exists on its own, without being necessarily related to something else. Otherwise it is called ‘mediate’ (vermittelt). If on the level of ordinary talk and not of speculative philosophy I speak of someone as a man, I am speaking of him as something ‘immediate’, for (at this level of talk anyway) a man can exist on his own. But if I speak of him as a father, or brother, or son, then he is seen as ‘mediate’, for his being one of these requires his relation to someone else.

Hegel’s point is that all descriptions of things as immediate turn out on closer examination to be inadequate; that all things show their necessary relation to something else, and ultimately to the whole. The whole itself can be characterized as immediate, a point Hegel sometimes makes; but he at once adds that this immediacy contains mediacy within it; and this for the obvious reason that the whole cannot even be stated without stating the dualism whose overcoming it is. To state the whole, we have to bring out two terms in opposition and yet in necessary relation (and hence mediate), and characterize the whole as the overcoming of this opposition (and hence also mediate).

Everything is thus mediate. For it cannot exist on its own. But its inability to exist on its own is supposed to spring from inner contradiction. Hence for Hegel contradiction must also be a universally applicable category.

Hegel says in a famous passage (WL, II, 58) that contradiction is as essential to reality as identity. Indeed, if he had to choose between these two as to which was more important, he would choose contradiction, for it is the source of all life and movement.

But this may sound itself contradictory. Hegel thinks of contradiction as the source of movement because whatever is in contradiction must pass over into something else, be this passage the ontological one between levels of being which go on existing coevally, or the historical one between different stages of human civilization. But it would seem impossible to have it both ways. If contradiction is the source of passages from one level to another, it is because it is fatal to continued existence, or so one would think from the commonsense principle that nothing contradictory can exist. Hegel seems to be using this commonsense principle when he explains dialectical passages in this way. And yet on the other hand things do go on existing (in the chain of being, if not in history) even after being convicted of contradiction, and indeed contradiction is said to be everywhere. How can we reconcile these affirmations?

The answer is that contradiction, as Hegel uses the term, is not wholly incompatible with existence, and as such perhaps does not really deserve the name. When we say that the whole is in contradiction, we mean that it unites identity and opposition, that it is opposed to itself. Perhaps one might want to amend this way of putting it to get over the apparent paradox. We might want to say, for instance, that ‘identity’ and ‘opposition’ are not to be considered incompatible. But to put it this way would miss part of the point, for in a way, Hegel wants to retain some of the force of the clash between ‘identity’ and ‘opposition’. For Geist is in struggle with himself, with his necessary embodiment, and only comes to realization out of this struggle. So that we would have to say that ‘opposition’ is both compatible and incompatible with ‘identity’.

The force of using ‘contradiction’ here is that what is necessary for Geist to be at all is an obstacle to its realization as fully self-conscious rationality, as we saw earlier. Perhaps we could use the term ‘ontological conflict’ for this. Then we could agree with Hegel that this ontological conflict is the source of movement and change; for it is that by which nothing can exist except in struggle, except by developing itself out of its opposite.

Now at the level of the whole this ontological conflict is not fatal because it is that which maintains the whole as Geist. But at the level of any part, taken by itself, it is; for this part cannot exist on its own. We could say that there is a contradiction in a stricter sense which attaches to any attempt to characterize any part of the whole – finite spirit, or thing – as self-sufficient. For the partial is essentially related to the whole. It can only be as an expression of the whole and hence of its opposite. Thus in holding only to the self-identity of the finite we are presenting what is essentially in ontological conflict as though it escaped it; and this is a contradiction in a more understandable sense. In Hegelian terms, any attempt by the logic of the ‘understanding’ to see things as self-identical and hence not in opposition to themselves involves a (fatal) contradiction. Because everything is in contradiction (in the sense of ontological conflict) to try to see things as simply self-identical involves us in contradictions (in a more ordinary sense). In other words, contradiction when we fully accept it is not fatal in the way it is when we still want to stick to our old ideas about ‘identity’ and ‘opposition’.

But the above is still not adequate to Hegel’s view. For the implication is still that all that contradiction is fatal to is theories, that is, partial ways of looking at things. Whereas we find in Hegel the idea many times stated that real existences go under because of contradiction. This is true of historical forms, but it is also true of finite spirits, animals, things. But, one might protest, these latter continue to exist, while historical forms disappear. Yes, Hegel replies, they go on existing as types, but the individual specimens go under; they are all mortal; and this mortality is necessary; it is a reflection of the ontological conflict.

We saw above that any attempt to claim independent existence, free from relation to the whole, and hence to its other, on behalf of a finite thing involved contradiction in the strict and thus fatal sense. But Hegel is suggesting that we see the very external existence of a finite thing, material object, animal or finite spirit, as a kind of claim to independent existence. It is the property of matter that it exists partes extra partes, and that things that exist materially have a kind of independent existence. Thus it is not just that material existence suggests independence to us; it is itself a form of independent existence, a standing claim to be on its own. It is essential that this claim be made, as we have seen; for Geist requires external material existence in order to be. But it is just as essential that this claim be abrogated, for Geistcan only be in a world in which the parts are essentially related in this way. And this is what determines the fate of finite things. They must come into existence, but at the same time they are the victims of an internal contradiction which assures that they will also pass away. They are necessarily mortal. But at the same time, in going under they have to be replaced by other similar things.

We can now see more clearly the underlying principle of those ascending dialectics in which Hegel will show that finite things cannot exist on their own, but only as part of a larger whole. The motor of these dialectics is contradiction; and the contradiction consists in this, that finite beings just in virtue of existing externally in space and time make a claim to independence, while the very basis of their existence is that they express a spirit which cannot brook this independence. The ascending dialectic reveals the contradiction in things and shows from the nature of the contradiction how it can only be understood and reconciled if things are seen as part of the self-movement of the Absolute.

Thus contradiction, in the strong sense which involves combining ontological conflict with its denial, is mortal. But since this ‘denial’ is not just an intellectual error by us who observe, but is essential to the whole which is in ontological conflict itself, we can see that contradiction in the strong sense is what makes things move and change. It is their inherent changeability (Veränderlichkeit); while contradiction in the sense of ontological conflict is the source of this changeability.

Contradiction is thus fatal to partial realities, but not to the whole. But this is not because the whole escapes contradiction. Rather the whole as Hegel understands it lives on contradiction. It is really because it incorporates it, and reconciles it with identity that it survives. This the partial reality – material object or finite spirit – cannot encompass. It is stuck with its own independent existence, and since this independence clashes with the basis of its existence, it is caught in contradiction and must die. It must die because it is identified with only one term, the affirmation, and cannot encompass the denial.

Not so the whole. The absolute goes on living through both the affirmation and the denial of finite things. It lives by this process of affirmation and denial; it lives via the contradiction in finite things. Thus the absolute is essentially life and movement and change. But at the same time, it remains itself, the same subject, the same essential thought being expressed, throughout this movement. It reconciles identity and contradiction by maintaining itself in a life process which is fed on ontological conflict. This combination of incessant change and immobility is described by Hegel in a striking image from the preface of PhG: ‘The true is thus the bacchanalian whirl in which no member is not drunken; and because each, as soon as it detaches itself, dissolves immediately – the whirl is just as much transparent and simple repose’ (PhG 39).17

In the above we have found it useful to explain a basic point of Hegel’s ontology – the mortality of the finite – by using first the language of claim and denial and then moving to ontological analogues of these. In this we are following Hegel himself, who uses logical terms like ‘contradiction’ to express his ontology. But after the discussion of the previous section, we are better able to understand what has been called Hegel’s ‘pan-logism’.

For the absolute is subject, a subject who posits its own embodiment, and posits it according to rational necessity. And this means as we saw that the universe should be seen not only as the embodiment of a cosmic life, but also under the category of expression. Its structures express or manifest the lineaments of rational necessity, since it is posited not just to embody spirit, but also to be understood by spirit in its own self-awareness.18 Hence the universe reflects rational necessity in two ways; it conforms to it, and it expresses it. It can be seen as in a sense analogous to a statement.

Of course, the analogy is very incomplete. We think normally of a statement as couched in a medium, a language, which for the most part pre-exists; and as bearing on some extra-linguistic reality to which it refers. Here the ‘medium’ consists in the various orders of external reality and is coeval with the ‘statement’ of conceptual necessity made in it. And what is said is not about some reality external to the medium; for rational necessity not only manifests itself in external reality, but comes to be only in this embodiment.

Closer analogies can be found in expressive activity or in a work of art. An original work can partly forge its own medium, or at least profoundly transform pre-existing languages of expression. And the expressive activity of a subject, the way he gives vent to anger, joy, or whatever is in an important sense not ‘about’ something external. The expression not only manifests the emotion, but helps determine what it is.

Thus is a way unique to itself, although we can illuminate it with these analogues, the universe can be seen as an expression of rational necessity. And this is the basis of Hegel’s use of logical terminology in an ontological context.

Of course, it is not at all unnatural to extend the use of a word like ‘contradiction’ out of the purely logical realm of statement and denial into that of purposive behaviour. If someone makes a certain gesture which is aimed at a certain result and which negates it; if he wants to persist in this, then we say that he is behaving in a contradictory fashion. And this is what Geist can be said to do, in that it cannot help but posit external finite reality, and yet this negates it and has to be in turn negated.

But the relation becomes even closer when the purpose itself is seen as one of self-knowledge; for in this case the purpose is one which cannot be properly stated without the use of ‘logical’ language of assertion and denial. If spirit is striving to express itself, then all the partial forms which exist as stages in its growth can be seen as related to assertions. A given form of civilization is linked with a certain view of God and the absolute, and hence a certain form of self-knowledge of Geist. But in an analogous way, the very external existence of finite reality can be seen as something like a claim. For it is posited by Geist whose basic goal is to come, as it were, to a definitive statement about himself. In positing the world Geist is showing what he is. To leave finite matter as truly independent would be thus in effect to say something false. Geist is therefore forced to deny it by ‘taking it back’. Both existence and mortality of the finite are necessary; and both can be seen in this context quite naturally as assertion and denial; hence the use of the word ‘contradiction’.

The notion that the world is posited will allow Hegel to use a language in which he talks not just of things being identical with their other, but of things turning into their other. This is clearly true of the external embodiment, which comes to inner self-consciousness in Geist. But because the world is seen as posited, Hegel will speak, not indeed of Geist – this word is reserved for the subjectivity returning to itself out of its embodiment – but of the Idea as going out into its other, exteriority. The Idea, as we shall see in the next part, is the formula of the whole as a chain of necessary connections. This shows the whole as necessarily embodied; and it is this necessity which is the basis for Hegel’s language of ‘positing’. The Idea becomes its other, and then returns into self-consciousness in Geist.

7
This is what Hegel means by absolute idealism. This is paradoxically very different from all other forms of idealism, which tend to the denial of external reality, or material reality. In the extreme form of Berkeley’s philosophy, we have a denial of matter in favour of a radical dependence on the mind – of course God’s, not ours. Hegel’s idealism, far from being a denial of external material reality, is the strongest affirmation of it; it not only exists but necessarily exists.

‘Idealism’ here does not refer us to the ‘ideas’ of Cartesians and empiricists, i.e., ideas as the content of the mind; but on the contrary to the Ideas of Plato. Kant had already rehabilitated the term in a Plato-related sense with his ideas of reason; and Hegel follows this use.

Absolute idealism means that nothing exists which is not a manifestation of the Idea, that is, of rational necessity. Everything exists for a purpose, that of the coming to be of rational self-consciousness, and this requires that all that exists be the manifestation of rational necessity. Thus absolute idealism is related to the Platonic notion of the ontological priority of rational order, which underlies external existence, and which external existence strives to realize, rather than to the modern post-Cartesian notion of dependence on knowing mind.

‘Negativity’ is another fundamental Hegelian term whose use is closely connected with the above discussion of contradiction. Opposites negate each other, and since within everything that exists there is opposition, we can also say that within everything there is negativity. In particular Hegel links negativity to the subject, whose nature is to return to itself (self-consciousness) through its opposite; and in the case of the cosmic Geist, to posit its opposite. So Hegel says (PhG, 20) that substance is ‘as subject […] pure, simple negativity’.

We can think of the movement which posits and holds other being or external reality as something independent as negativity, as ‘the tremendous power of the negative’ (PhG, 29).19 And we can also think of the movement by which the particular external forms go under and pass over into others as the work of negativity. For negativity is opposition, and since opposition is essential to everything, everything is in contradiction, contains negativity, and thus is in movement.

This term allows Hegel to link two theses: that all that exists is contradictory and hence mortal (because containing negation), and that all that exists can only be described in concepts which being determinate involve negation. (Hegel takes up the Spinozan thesis here omnis determinatio est negatio.) The very use of determinate descriptive concepts involves the negation of others, for these concepts can only have determinate sense against a background of others with which they are contrasted. Hegel will claim that this link between ‘negation’ and determinate being (Dasein) is a manifestation of the negativity which is essentially in and constitutive of Dasein.20

The use of logical language in an ontological sense which is legitimated by absolute Idealism is also evident in the Hegelian use of the term ‘concept’ (Begriff). Because he sees the world as posited rational necessity, as the external manifestations of the Idea, the concepts which are true of it are not just true of it as a matter of contingent, unexplained fact but provide the ground plan according to which it was posited. So that we move from seeing the concept as a descriptive term correctly applied by us to seeing it as the underlying necessity which brought what it applies to being. When Hegel speaks of the Concept, then, the concept of the whole, he often speaks in the mature works of a concept which is also subjectivity, for the rational necessity behind the whole is that of self-knowing subjectivity. This is ‘the self-conceiving concept’ (der sich begreifende Begriff, WL, II, 504).

But there are two other Hegelian uses of ‘concept ‘which are connected with this circle of ideas. Hegel’s view is one of reality in development, as we have seen. The Absolute is essentially result; in its true form it is the end-process of growth. Hegel is fond of the analogy of the plant, and uses the Aristotelian language of potentiality and actuality. This latter in particular (Wirklichkeit) is a very frequently used Hegelian term. In ordinary German, it could be translated ‘reality’; but in Hegel’s use it applies not just to any reality but only to that which is the developed manifestation of rational necessity.

But this use of the plant analogy and the recourse to the Aristotelian categories requires a pendant term to Wirklichkeit to express potentiality, the germ of inner necessity before it is fully actualized. And for this the term ‘concept’ also frequently serves. In this second sense, then, things are said to be in their concept, when they are in germ, when they have just started to develop. This use is more frequent than the first earlier on, and seems to be the standard use in the PhG. For instance in the Preface to this work, Hegel speaks of our time as one of ‘birth and transition to a new period’ (PhG, 15). This new period is in its infancy; what has stepped forward is only its ‘concept’.

As well as being self-knowing subjectivity in the form of rational necessity underlying the developed whole, the concept can thus also be seen as this necessity qua germ in contrast to actuality. And it can easily thence be extended to a third sense in which it is contrasted to reality in the ordinary sense (Realität), or rather in the more special sense of external reality before it has been shaped and developed to actuality. For this externality is always there – and this is where the plant analogy is inadequate – even when the ‘concept’ is in germ; at this stage it is simply not yet properly formed, it is not yet an adequate manifestation of rational necessity: this we can see, for instance, with the early institutions of human history which will later become the law-state based on reason. At this point their ‘reality’ can be contrasted to their ‘concept’ in the sense of the plan of their fully developed form. ‘Concept’ here is thus the formula of their full-fledged stage, towards which they are headed, this is what is only implicit in ‘concept’ as germ, and which can be contrasted to the raw unformed reality of the present stage.

The stages of development also underlie another set of Hegelian terms which have achieved notoriety. The implicit stage of a process, where the reality concerned is still in germ, is often characterized by the term ‘an sich’.21 Hegel says (PhG, 22) that the embryo is ‘an sich Mensch’. By contrast the fully developed form is characterized as ‘für sich’.22 But sometimes there is a third stage; for as we have seen the basis of things is to be understood as an Idea which posits the external reality necessary for its realization, and then develops to this full realization in the external reality. In this process, the first stage is characterized as ‘an sich’, the second as ‘für sich’ and the third as ‘anundfürsich’.

The idea behind this language seems to be this: the an sich is the implicit, the as yet undeveloped, the self-identical; while the ‘für sich’ is the fully deployed, exteriorized, which therefore lies, as it were ‘before itself. In the simpler case of the plant, these represent the only two stages; it is in germ, and then it is fully unfolded (entfaltet). But in the case of the full Hegelian theory of reality as posited manifestation of rational necessity, there are three. This necessity in germ, as it were, as yet self-identical, is the Idea. It must be exteriorized, unfolded, and thus fürsich. But this means that it loses at first its self-identity; Geist is lost in external reality. But in returning to adequate self-knowledge Geist realizes a kind of combination of the first two stages, he comes back to self-identity in the opposite of fully developed external reality; and so can be considered as anundfürsich.

There are other uses of ‘an sich’ in Hegel. Often it carries the sense of self-contained, not dependent on anything outside. Of course, only the whole is truly an sich in this sense, although partial realities may appear so at different stages of the dialectic. In this usage ‘an sich’ is usually contrasted to ‘für anderes’ – ‘for another’, i.e., dependent on something else. Or else ‘an sich’ can be used in a closely related sense, when we consider a thing ‘in itself in contrast to what it is for consciousness (e.g., the contrast of ‘an sich’ and ‘für das Bewußtsein’ in the introduction of the PhG).23

This same circle of ideas underlies the Hegelian uses of the term ‘universal’. Underlying reality is the rational necessity which links all forms of being to self-knowing subjectivity. Or as Hegel expresses it frequently, underlying ‘being’ there is ‘thought’ (Denken); being and thought (Sein und Denken) are one. This thought is of course the Concept, and ‘concept’ leads us naturally to ‘universal’.

But like the concept, the universal can take on a different aspect in relation to the different stages of development. As a concept underlying external reality, but taken on its own outside of, or ‘before’ this reality, the universal is ‘abstract’. It is rather like the traditional idea of the universal as a common formula of a given type of thing, arrived at by abstraction from the particular properties of its instances. But of course, as we now know, an abstraction of this kind cannot be; the concept must posit an external reality. And hence we get the concrete universal, the concept embodied in external reality which is there to realize it, to express the idea involved.

But as concrete, the universal can no longer be considered distinct from and merely externally related to the particular (das Besondere). It is not just that as instantiated it must occur together at a particular place or time with some other properties, etc. For we could still think of the universal as without any inner relation to the particular features of its instances. But we cannot look at Hegel’s concrete universal in this way. For the embodiment of the concrete universal is the manifestation of the necessity contained in the idea concerned, and it is moreover a necessary manifestation, that is, can be seen as posited by it; and for both these reasons Hegel makes us look at the relation between universal and embodiment on the model of that between thought and expression. The concrete universal is the expressed universal or thought. It should not be seen as united indifferently with just any particular features, but these latter should be seen as deployed in order to instantiate it.

The universal is shown here to be in inner relation to the particular (das Besondere). Sometimes, however, it is related to the individual (das Einzelne); and sometimes to both; for Hegel uses this analysis of the universal in a host of contexts; like many Hegelian terms it expresses a theme with many variations.

One of the variations turns on the close relation between the two dimensions of embodiment, that which relates thought and expression and that which relates life and organism. We have just seen the universal and particular in the first; it is not surprising that they appear in the second. As the abstract universal can be seen as what remains in common to a multiplicity of things when their particular features are pared off, so the ‘I’ of the subject can be seen as a universal relative to all the particular changing contents of his mind and properties of his character.

And this abstract universal can be said to correspond to a certain stage of human development, that in which man steps back and tries to free himself from all particular contingent attachments, from the simply given facts of his nature and tradition in order to decide by universal criteria. But of course this project is not viable as such, and man can only come to freedom by embodying free rationality in an external mode of being and way of life which is designed for the purpose. This last stage corresponds to the concrete universal, and we can say that the individual cannot attain the universal except through the particular.

In still another, more restricted variant, the universal is set over against the individual as the reality of the collective spirit. The two have to be brought into reconciliation. What corresponds to the‘abstract’stage here is one in which the universal is more‘an sich’, is not yet developed into the set of institutions which effect this reconciliation with the citizens. There is of course a parallel evolution on the part of the individual, which was briefly sketched in the previous paragraph.

The idea that actuality develops within an external reality which exists already, which has thus to be formed to be a proper manifestation of internal necessity, is the basis of a paradoxical reflection on the inner and the outer of which Hegel is fond and which often re-appears in his work.

As reality develops towards actuality, e.g., as political institutions develop towards the law-state or as we pass from inanimate matter to life, we can think of it as progressively ‘interiorized’, for its different features are more and more closely related to a central plan and it shows a greater and greater unity, which eventually must reach an ‘interiority ‘in the strong sense, consciousness. But at the same time we can see this as an exteriorization; for the necessity which was formerly hidden in the unformed external reality is now ‘exteriorized’ in the sense of manifested.

By the same token, we can consider the initial stage as one in which everything is ‘inner’ in the sense of non-manifest, but also as a stage of ‘exteriority’ in the sense that reality is more partes extra partes, that its parts are external to each other in not yet being manifestly bound by any internal necessity. Hence Hegel’s oft-repeated statement that a reality which is all internal is also necessarily all external.

One of the most important concepts to which Hegel gave a special twist is that of the infinite. One of the basic motivations of Hegel’s philosophy was to reconcile the finite with the infinite, as we saw; and Hegel’s thesis is, in fact, that the true infinite is not simply to be opposed to the finite but is in reality one with it; just as one might say that true Geist is not simply opposed to external being but is one with it.

This requires obviously a particular, and rather off-beat, conception of the infinite. Hegel’s starting point is that the infinite is that which is not bounded, which is pretty unexceptionable; but by bounded he means limited by something outside of it. The finite for Hegel as we have seen is what has something beyond which ‘negates’ it and thus gives it its determinate nature.

Thus we cannot see the infinite as something separate from, or ‘beyond’ the finite, as we do for instance when we think of God as infinite life existing beyond and independently of us as finite beings. For this would mean that the infite would be other than, and hence bounded by the finite. The infinite would have something outside of it, the finite, and hence would not be truly infinite.

The true infinite must thus include the finite. Can we then think of the infinite as the boundless, e.g., endless space which includes all the objects in it, or the series of natural numbers which includes each finite series while going on forever? Most definitely not. Hegel rejects this endless progression as the ‘bad infinite’. Rather than being a valid model of the infinite, this is rather a nightmarish perpetuation of the finite. For it means that wherever you choose to stop, there is always something beyond, that is, you have a whole which is bounded by something else, namely, the next step in the endless progress. You are always in finitude.

What is needed therefore is something which is not limited, in the sense of bounded from the outside, and yet not simply unlimited in the sense of being endlessly expansible without reaching a boundary; an infinite which is yet a whole one can encompass, or an infinite which is one with the finite.

It seems a tall order, but Hegel claims to have produced just this. For the universe according to Hegel is just such a whole which is not limited from the outside, and yet is not simply without limit. On the contrary, the whole of reality has a definite structure and extent in which each part has its necessary place, in that sense we can say that it has boundaries. But at the same time it is not bounded from the outside, for there is no outside, the universe is turned back on itself like a circle. That is, the boundaries of all existing things are boundaries with other constituents of the universe: each level of being is bounded by, and hence determined, and at the same time negated by, and hence passing over into a higher level. And at the apex is Geist which in turn passes into, that is, posits, external reality. Finite objects are limited by others, but they form part of a chain of levels of being which is circular. The universe thus has no external boundaries, only internal ones; and Hegel puts forward on this metaphysical level an idea which bears a strange analogy to certain popularizations of the physics of Einstein.

The proper image of infinity for Hegel is thus not a straight line indefinitely prolonged, but a circle. And we can see that on this conception the finite is not something separate from the infinite; the infinite is an ordered whole. More, the finite turns itself into the infinite; for we have seen that if we start with any partial reality we are referred beyond it, ultimately to the whole system. The finite as a whole is thus one with the infinite; and the infinite finds its only expression in the ordered whole of the finite.

Because reality is a circle, which can only present itself in its true form as the result of a process of development, which process is itself seen as posited by what results from it, we can only present the truth about the absolute in a system. Science itself must be a circle which reflects and gives an adequate account of the linked levels of being which are essential to the whole. As Hegel puts it ‘it is only as science or system that knowledge is actual (wirklich) and can be expounded’ (PhG, 23).24

To try to express this philosophy in any one principle or proposition is inherently against its nature. For the nature of reality as grounded on contradiction ensures that the negation of this proposition is also true: Geistis essentially embodied; and it is also opposed to this embodiment. External reality as external is in mutually independent parts; but this independence also contradicts its nature, so that it is inherently perishable. And so on. We can only come close to the truth by seeing how both affirmation and negation fit together and are necessary to each other. Science can only be a system.

The type of thought which underlies this form of science Hegel calls ‘reason ‘(Vernunft); this is the thinking which follows reality in its contradictions, and therefore can see how each level turns into the next one. Reason in this sense is contrasted to understanding (Verstand) which is the habit common to most, of holding fast to the principle of identity. The famous line of Butler, which G. E. Moore inscribed at the beginning of Principia Ethica, ‘Everything is what it is and not another thing’, this is the quintessence of Verstand. It is obvious that Verstand cannot really come to grips with philosophy as Hegel sees it, with ‘speculative ‘philosophy, but sees the truth as incomprehensible nonsense. Hegel speaks constantly of the fixed rigidity of Verstand. This is an inevitable stage of thought, in which it manages to give itself clarity and rigour as against the vague fluidity of ‘representation’ (Vorstellung), but it has to be gone beyond to a new fluidity.

Once again we can recognize a Kantian distinction which has been transformed. Reason for Kant was the faculty which tried to think the whole, as against understanding which operated in the immediate context; but Hegel has immensely enriched this distinction with his own theory.

8
We can see now how this system of thought offered the hope of overcoming the oppositions mentioned in the first section, without paying the price which the Romantics were willing to pay in abandoning free rationality. Hegel’s notion of the Absolute does give a sense to his thesis of the ‘identity of identity and difference’. And this is meant to allow him to have it both ways, as it were; to keep both terms of the opposition in their full force, and yet to see them as one; to see them as coming to unity out of opposition.

The major oppositions which we adumbrated in the first section were those between man and nature, from which he becomes divided both as a knowing subject and an agent; between individual and community; and between finite and infinite spirit, this last opposition is also reflected in man’s relation to fate.

The epistemological gap between man and nature expresses itself in its best known form in the Kantian distinction between phenomena and things-in-themselves. The latter were for ever and in principle unknowable. Hegel directs a powerful polemic against the Kantian thing-in-itself. And the final argument is this: how can there be anything beyond knowledge, that is beyond mind or Geist, for Geist turns out ultimately to be identical with the whole of reality?

More specifically, the opposition is overcome in the fact that our knowledge of the world turns ultimately into Geis’s self-knowledge. For we come to discover that the world which is supposedly beyond thought is really posited by thought, that it is a manifestation of rational necessity. And at the same time the thought which was supposedly over against the world, that is, our thinking as finite subjects, turns out to be that of the cosmos itself, or the cosmic subject, God, whose vehicles we are. In the higher vision of speculative philosophy, the world loses its otherness to thought, and subjectivity goes beyond finitude, and hence the two meet. We overcome the dualism between subject and world, between knowing man and nature, in seeing the world as the necessary expression of thought, or rational necessity, while we see ourselves as the necessary vehicles of this thought, as the point where it becomes conscious. (And become conscious it must, for the rationally necessary order of things includes the necessity that this rationally necessary order appear to itself.)

This means that we come to see ourselves not just as finite subjects, with our own thoughts as it were, but as the vehicles of a thought which is more than just ours, that is in a sense the thought of the universe as a whole, or in Hegel’s terms, of God.

Hegel’s answer to the Kantian doctrine of the Ding-an-sich is thus to throw down the barrier between man and the world in having the knowledge of finite subjects culminate in the self-knowledge of infinite subject. But he does not break through the barrier by a Romantic abandonment in which subject and object are felt ultimately to coincide in a kind of ineffable intuition of unity.

Rather Hegel solves the problem of uniting finite to infinite spirit without loss of freedom through his notion of reason. As we saw at the end of Chapter I, none of Hegel’s Romantic contemporaries resolved this dilemma. Either they held to the vision of an unboundedly free creative subject, but at the cost of exile in a God-forsaken world; or they sought unity with the divine beyond reason, but at the cost of abandoning their autonomy to a larger order beyond their comprehension. For Hegel too the finite subject must be part of a larger order. But since this is an order deployed by an unconditional rational necessity, it is at no point foreign to ourselves as rational subjects. Nothing in it must just be accepted as brute, ‘positive’ fact. The rational agent loses none of his freedom in coming to accept his vocation as vehicle of cosmic necessity.

Nor does this union with cosmic spirit only accomodate us as subjects of rational thought at the expense of our lower, empirical, desiring nature; for this too is part of the necessary order of things. The infinite subject is such that in order to be he must have an external embodiment; and who says external embodiment says embodiment in space and time, an embodiment which is somewhere and sometime, in a particular living being, with all that this involves. The infinite subject can only be through a finite one.

Hence nothing of us is abandoned when we come to assume our full role as vehicles of Geist. Because the order of which we are a part is deployed by a spirit whose nature is unadulterated rational necessity, and because this spirit necessarily posits us as finite subjects, we can identify with it without remainder. By this vision of absolute reason, ungrounded in the merely given, Hegel believes himself to have resolved the dilemma of the Romantic generation.

Two related essential features of the Hegelian solution follow from this. The first is that the unity of man and world, of finite and infinite subject, does not abolish the difference. Not only is the unity hard-won out of difference, as man struggles to rise to the level where the unity can be grasped; but the ultimate unity retains the difference within it. We remain finite subjects over against the world and God, men with all the particularities of our time, place and circumstances, even as we come to see this particular existence as part of a larger plan, as we come to be vehicles of a larger self-consciousness, that of Geist. Spirit’s return to unity necessarily incorporates duality.

Secondly, the Absolute must be understood in concepts (begriffen) as Hegel insists in the Preface to the PhG (13), and not in feeling and intuition (Gefühl und Anschauung). Man cannot abandon understanding, the ‘frightful power’ (ungeheure Macht, PhG, 29) by which men analyse their world, divide themselves from nature and fix the distinctions between things. This is in a sense like the power of death which removes things from the stream of life. But we cannot overcome it by fleeing from it, but only by pushing this power of clear thought to the limit, where the division is overcome in the dialectical thought of reason. The great power of understanding is ‘to hold onto what is dead’ (das Tote festzuhalten). The life of the spirit is one which ‘endures, and preserves itself through, death’. It finds itself only in ‘absolute self-division’ (absolute Zerrissenheit, 29–30).25 A certain ‘powerless beauty’ (kraftlose Schönheit) cannot do this, and it thus cannot come to a real vision of unity, for it can never incorporate the ‘seriousness, the pain, the patience and the labour of the negative’ (20).

Hegel will not abandon the clear distinctions of thought. But he claims to have his cake and eat it through his new concept of reason. This is founded on the ontological thesis that these oppositions themselves proceed from and return to identity; so that the thought which marks the clearest distinction is also that which unites. The opposition itself, pushed to the limit, goes over into identity. Man separates from nature in the course of realizing his vocation as a rational being. But it is just this vocation fully realized, just the full development of rationality which shows him to himself as the vehicle of Geist and thus reconciles the opposition.

This idea of a duality which is overcome without being abolished finds expression in two key Hegelian terms. The first is ‘Aufhebung’. This is Hegel’s term for the dialectical transition in which a lower stage is both annulled and preserved in a higher one. The German word ‘aufheben’ can in fact carry either of these meanings. Hegel combined them to make his term of art.

Secondly, because the unity does not just abolish the distinction, Hegel often speaks of the resolution as a ‘reconciliation’ (Versöhnung); this word implies that the two terms remain, but that their opposition is overcome.

This term ‘reconciliation’ comes often to the fore in connection with the opposition between man and God, between finite and infinite spirit, as can well be imagined. As far as the theoretical opposition is concerned, its resolution is already implicit in the foregoing discussion of the duality man-world. For this latter was overcome by our showing the ultimate identity of God’s self-knowledge with man’s knowledge of the universe. That is, ultimately art, religion and philosophy, what Hegel calls ‘absolute spirit’, give us the self-knowledge of Geist. The idea of God as necessarily hidden and unknowable is therefore overcome, although like the idea of the Ding-an-sich it belongs to a necessary stage of human development.

How about the practical oppositions, between man as agent and nature, between man and the state, man and his fate?

Man had to turn against nature within and without, to curb instinct within himself, and to treat the things around him as instruments to be bent to his will. He had to break with an earlier unity and communion with nature.26 He had to ‘desacralize’ (entgöttern) the world. This was an essential step towards freedom.

But here, too, the opposition, pushed to its limit, leads to reconciliation. The moral agent who strives to act on the dictates of pure practical reason independent of inclination is finally forced by reason itself to a conception of himself as vehicle of Geist and hence to a reconciliation with the nature of things, speculatively understood, which is also an expression of Geist. This reconciliation does not mean a return to original unity but preserves rational freedom.

At the same time man in acting on external nature to serve his purposes, in working, helps to transform it and himself, and to bring both sides towards the eventual reconciliation. This idea of the crucial importance of work, which is central to Marx’s theory, originates with Hegel. He deals with it specifically for instance in the discussion of master and slave in the second part of the PhG. But there is an important difference between the two views. It is clear that for both writers man forms himself, comes to realize his own essence in the attempt to dominate and transform nature. But the major difference is that for Marx the actual changes wrought in nature and the consequent man-made environment are of major significance, while for Hegel the role of work and its products is mainly to create and sustain a universal consciousness in man. This of course reflects the fact that for Marx the industrial revolution was the major fact of human history while Hegel’s thought is still concerned with what was largely a pre-industrial world. But it also reflects, of course, the (related) major difference between what each writer considered to be the human essence.

As for the opposition between man and the state, we can already see how this will be overcome in Hegel’s system. The state plays an important role as an embodiment of the universal in human life. In the formation of the individual as a vehicle of universal reason, the state has an indispensable part. In belonging to it the individual is already living beyond himself in some larger life; and as the state comes to its ‘truth’ as an expression of universal reason in the form of law, it brings the individual with it toward his ultimate vocation.

Thus in its more primitive forms, the state can be and is in opposition to man who aspires to be a free self-conscious individual. But this opposition is destined to be overcome. For the free individual must ultimately come to see himself as the vehicle of universal reason; and when the state comes to its full development as the embodiment of this reason, then the two are reconciled. Indeed, the free individual cannot realize himself as free outside the state. For it follows with Hegel’s principle that there can be no dis-embodied spiritual life that he cannot accept a definition of freedom like that of the Stoics, which sees it as an inner condition of man unaffected by his external fate. A purely inner freedom is only a wish, a shadow. It is an important stage of human development when he comes to have this wish, this idea, but it must not be confused with the real thing. Freedom is only real (wirklich) when expressed in a form of life; and since man cannot live on his own, this must be a collective form of life; but the state is the collective mode of life which is backed by the full power of the community; and thus freedom must be embodied in the state.

The last practical opposition is that between finite and infinite life and is brought home most forcefully by a consideration of fate. We can endow human life with as much significance as we wish in considering man, the rational animal, as the vehicle of universal reason. This goes for what man does at the full stretch of his powers. But what about the absurdity of what just happens, including the greatest absurdity of all, death? How do we incorporate this in a meaningful whole? Or to put it in another way, how do we justify the ways of God (laying on him the responsibility of fate) to man?

Hegel is ready to take this on too. He speaks of his philosophy of history as a ‘theodicy’, and we can see why. Man’s fate can be given a place in the skein of necessity just as well as his achievements.27 Death itself, the death of particular men, is necessary in the scheme of things, as is the death of any animal, and the ultimate disappearance of any external reality; for as external all these things are in contradiction to themselves and must go under.

But more than for the death of men, Hegel in his philosophy of history accounts for the death of civilizations. What seems senseless and ultimately unjustified, the destruction and decay of some of the finest earlier civilizations,28 is shown to be a necessary stage on the road to realization of Geist in the law-state and reason. That is, not only death itself, but the particular incidence of fate in history is shown to be part of the meaningful plan, with which man as reason can be fully reconciled.

One may stop well short of conviction before Hegel’s theodicy. It is indeed difficult to see how man can be reconciled to fate, how he can fail to see it as a ‘negation’. Even if we accept the general plan of history, and are reconciled to the death of civilization, how do we understand as meaningful the premature death of quite non-world-historical individuals, of children, for instance? One doesn’t have to go to the lengths of Ivan Karamazov and give a weight greater than world history to the tears of an innocent child in order to feel that Hegel has not met the difficulty.

But in Hegel’s view such instances of individual fate are beneath the sweep of necessity; they fall in the domain of that interstitial contingency whose existence is necessary, as we have seen. We can be reconciled with this as well as with world history if we identify with what we essentially are, universal reason. If we really come to see ourselves as vehicles of universal reason, then death is no longer an ‘other’; for it is part of the plan. We are in that sense already beyond death; it is no longer a limit. It is incorporated in the life of reason which goes on beyond it.

This, of course, is the real meaning for Hegel of what is expressed in the mode of ‘representation’ (Vorstellung) in the traditional doctrine of the immortality of the soul. Although Hegel often says that this doctrine is one of the marks of the true religion and could only arise at a high stage of human religious development, he does not actually believe in individual survival after death; if what survives is thought of as disembodied, then this would in any case be an impossibility on Hegel’s principle. But the idea of the eternity of personality expresses a profound truth nevertheless; not just the banal idea that although I die, rational life goes on; but the deeper speculative idea that even death is part of the necessary embodiment posited by subjectivity; death is not an external negation of subjectivity, but is part of what is posited by subjectivity, by Geist, in order to be.

9
I have given only the briefest outline here of the way in which Hegel believes himself to have resolved the dualisms which aroused the deepest concern in his time and which provided the most powerful motivation of his own philosophical effort; of how in short he thought to answer the aspiration of the age in uniting the greatest rational autonomy with the fullest expressive unity with nature. The discussion of these solutions in detail provides some of the richest passages of Hegel’s work. In the next part, I should like to examine some of these.

Up to now, I have just been trying to present the general lines of Hegel’s system. But it follows from its very nature as here presented, as a system which claims to reconcile the major oppositions by reason itself, that it cannot just be presented, but has to be demonstrated. Rather, we might say that its only adequate presentation is a demonstration.

What can we consider a demonstration? A demonstration must be able to take us from our ordinary understanding of things, and show that this is untenable, that it must give way to Hegel’s vision of things. It will start therefore at the bottom, with the disconnected external jumble which we see as the world, and force us to move to the vision of a system of necessity whose apex is Geist.

One obvious path for a demonstration will therefore start from the hierarchy of being which we all observe and show it to be connected systematically in the way adumbrated above. We will show this hierarchy of beings to be the embodiment and manifestation of a formula of rational necessity in which each level has its necessary place. We will start with the lowest and most external level, matter extended in time and space, we will lay bare its underlying concepts and its necessary links to higher levels. In this way we will pass through the various stages of inanimate being, through the various levels of life to spirit, which in turn will show a development in human history.

This is the demonstration which occupies the philosophy of nature and the philosophy of spirit; which is thus laid out in the latter two sections of the Encyclopaedia, and in the various works which expand parts of this, such as the Philosophy of Right, philosophies of history, religion, history of philosophy, aesthetics, etc.

But we can think of another demonstration which is in a sense prior to this one. The entire chain of being which we run through in the above demonstration is a manifestation of a chain of rational necessity, the formula of which is expressed in the Idea, as we have said. Why not then get at this more directly by a study not of the various kinds of reality as in the above demonstration, but simply of the categories in which we think the world? In examining each of these we shall find that on its own it is contradictory, that it refers us beyond itself, and that ultimately the only category that can maintain itself will be the Idea. We can then conceive of a demonstration which starts with the poorest, most empty category, with ‘being’, and which shows its internal contradiction, and hence passes on to other categories which are in turn shown to be contradictory, moving always to higher and higher levels of complexity, until we come to the Idea. This is the demonstration which we find in the Logic, and hence in the first part of the Encyclopaedia.

Is there room for another demonstration? In a sense not, that is, not on the same level. For the two previous ones form a perfect circle. The logic develops our understanding of the categories until we come to the Idea, which shows us that these categories are necessarily embodied in external reality; we therefore turn to examine this external reality, at first in its most ‘external’ form, and we climb the scale of the philosophy of nature and then that of spirit. At the culmination of this we reach the vision of absolute spirit, of the life of God as the perfect self-knowledge of the whole. But what does God know in knowing himself? Obviously the chain of rational necessity which is laid out in the Logic and which culminates in the Idea. So we have come full circle.

But whatever the value of this reasoning, the fact is that Hegel did give us a third demonstration, that which we find in the Phenomenology. We can think of it as a kind of prologomenon, an introduction to the main system. Hegel wrote the work in 1806–7, a number of years before he published the definite form of his system; and one may wonder therefore what role he retrospectively gave it; and this particularly in that the title ‘phenomenology’ re-appears to designate a section of the philosophy of spirit, and this section does go over some of the ground covered in the earlier work.

But the answer to this can only be speculative (in the ordinary slightly pejorative and not in the Hegelian sense). We do have in fact in the PhG the most powerful and exciting of Hegel’s works. Its principle is to start not from the forms of being, or from the categories, but from the forms of consciousness. It is in that sense the demonstration which fulfils best one of Hegel’s principal goals which is to take us from where we are and bring us to a vision of the system.

The idea is thus to start with the poorest, most elementary notion of what consciousness is, to show that this cannot stand up, that it is riven with inner contradiction, and must give way to another higher one; this one in turn is shown to be contradictory, and we are thus referred farther until we come to the true understanding of consciousness as self-knowing Geist, or absolute knowledge.

Hegel is perhaps clearest of all in the Introduction to the PhG about his aim to take us by argument from where we are to where he is, not by drawing in any external considerations, or by refutation of our view from the outside, as it were, but purely by taking up the inner logic of our own starting point. The PhG is thus a kind of itinerary of our conceptions of ourselves, or perhaps more accurately, a struggle by Hegel to wrench his own conception of Geist out of those of his contemporaries, views which arise of necessity in the course of man’s spiritual itinerary, but which now have to be set aside and which must be combatted with polemical force. The PhG is above all a work of self-clarification, and is shot through with a powerful inner tension, and this is what gives it its extraordinary forcefulness and fascination.

Our next task must then be to go through these three major demonstrations of Hegel’s philosophy. And it would be most sensible to go into them in the order of priority which holds between them, in the reverse order, that is, to that in which they have been mentioned here. We should start, therefore, with the prolegomenon to the system, the Phenomenology.

 

 

1 Quoted from the Walter Kaufmann translation, Hegel: texts and commentary, New York, Anchor books, 1966, p. 20.

2 ‘die Aufhebung der Entzweiung’ as he puts it in Different, p. 75.

3 Of course, Kant made some tentative steps towards mediation in his third critique. But Kant was careful never to commit himself beyond the bounds of dualism. Thus the teleological understanding of living things is a way we have of ordering phenomena ‘as if’ they served final causes. Kant’s successors, including Hegel, went beyond this.

4 Thus spake Zarathustra, Everyman Edition, 126.

5 Cf. the preface to the PhG, p. 19.

6 This notion of a hierarchy of forms is the negation of reductivist explanation, which looks forward to being able to account for the higher functions of organisms with the same explanatory concepts and principles by which one accounts for the lower ones, and indeed, would extend this homogeneity of explanation downwards to the inanimate.

If anything a theory like Hegel’s is the exact inverse of a reductivist theory. For to the extent that one level illuminates others, it is the higher which casts light on the lower, being a fuller realization of what the lower is aiming at. But we cannot take this too far, for the lower cannot be accounted for by the principles of the higher which are richer and more complex. They are related to the higher by impoverishment. Hence they are different kinds of entity, and not just applications of the same basic principles, as on the reductive hypothesis.

7 As, for instance, in the divisions of the PhG.

8 Or as he puts it, the notion that I = I, a formulation which shows the Fichtean background of his reflections on this subject.

9 Cf. Hegel’s assertion about the external articulation of the universe at the very end of the Logic, the point of transition to the philosophy of nature. The Idea’, as freedom, also leaves its embodiment ‘free’. It is not embodied in an external reality which it controls tightly but which is left to develop to the full limit of externality, right up to ‘the exteriority of space and time, existing absolutely for itself without subjectivity’ (WL, II, 505).

10 Hegel missed a trick in not espousing a theory of evolution a half century before Darwin. Instead he holds that while human culture has a sequential development, the whole order of things in nature, including animal species, does not. The linked ascending order of things in nature is to be understood not temporally as with historical forms, but timelessly. Hegel’s reason for making this distinction, that only spirit can have a history, sounds ‘Hegelian’ enough. But in fact he could have found grounds for accepting a theory of evolution if he had believed it to be true on other grounds. Indeed, it fits if anything better, in that all transitions in the philosophy of nature could have been temporal as well. This is another example of how Hegel’s philosophy of nature was dependent on (his understanding of) the science of his time as well as other writers in the same field like Schelling; while his philosophies of man and history struck out beyond all contemporaries.

11 We must stress here that it is a matter of the basic structure; Hegel does not hold that the world has no contingency in detail, as it were. On the contrary, there is contingency, and also must be of necessity, according to the structure of things! We shall see this below.

12 Cf. also PhG, 193–5.

13 Hegel’s dialectical arguments, as we shall see below, are of course more complex than the transcendental-type argument in the above example, although they incorporate this latter type. But they rely on the same kind of conceptual necessity.

14 ‘ohne Welt ist Gott nicht Gott’.

15 Walter Kaufmann, translation 28.

16 Walter Kaufmann, translation 32.

17 ‘Das Wahre ist so der bacchantische Taumel, an dem kein Glied nicht trunken ist, und weil jedes, indem es sich absondert, ebenso unmittelbar (sich) auflöst – ist er ebenso die durchsichtige und einfache Ruhe.’ Walter Kaufmann, translation 70.

18 God thus posits the world in order to think himself in it. This notion of God as self-thinking thought shows Hegel’s debt to Aristotle, which indeed is evident enough throughout his work. Hegel’s God is the lineal descendant of the God of the Metaphysics, but extended now to incorporate everything.

19 ‘die ungeheure Macht des Negativen’, Walter Kaufmann, translation 50.

20 Cf. Part m in the discussion of the Logic.

21 Literally ‘in itself, but as it figures in ordinary German it would often best be translated ‘by itself or ‘as such’.

22 Literally, ‘for itself. These terms sound so awkward in English that I propose to go on using the German expressions in the text.

23 With this latter use we come close to Kant’s sense of the term. Kant applied the term ‘an sich’ to things outside of their relation to our knowledge of them. The English translation ‘thing in itself seems right for the Kantian ‘Ding-an-sich’. ‘An sich ‘is opposed here to für uns’ (for us). Some of the Hegelian uses are obviously related, and for them too ‘in itself would not be a bad translation. But it is obvious that in Hegel’s first sense, the term is very different, for here the point of contrast is with ‘für sich’; ‘an sich’ does not mean out of relation to something other (our faculty of knowing), but on the contrary rather ‘implicit’ (as it has sometimes been translated in English). In other words, for Kant a valid translation of ‘an sich’ into English might have been ‘by itself, but this would miss the essential point of the Hegelian term.

24 Walter Kaufmann, translation 36.

25 Walter Kaufmann, translation 50.

26 There was in fact more than one such break in the Hegelian view of history. For the period of ‘original unity’ par excellence, the one that was the object of the greatest nostalgia in the late eighteenth century – classical Greece – was itself the product in Hegel’s view of man’s shaping of himself and nature, which culminated in the creation of an art centred on human form. It was preceded by more primitive stages, and was already an achievement.

27 Hegel’s mature ‘theodicy’ thus develops out of the conception of fate he expounded in the MS of the 1790s, called ‘the Spirit of Christianity ‘which we discussed in the previous chapter. But it now encompasses much more. The destiny with which men reconcile themselves now incorporates division as well as unity.

28 Hegel speaks in his lectures on the philosophy of history of the melancholy and sorrow we cannot help feeling when we look on the ruins of ancient civilizations, and reflect ‘daß die reichste Gestaltung, das schönste Leben in der Geschichte den Untergang finden, daß wir da unter Trummern des Vortrefflichen wandeln’ (VG 34–5).

 
    