## CHAPTER VII
## The Road to Manifest Religion
 

 

1
With religion we enter a new point of view from which the development of Geist can be read, along with those we have seen earlier: consciousness, self-consciousness, reason and (objective) spirit. But this point of view is not simply on a par with the others. On the contrary, religion is the standpoint of Geist’s or the absolute’s consciousness of itself.

We have seen that for Hegel the ultimate reality which must come to fruition and full self-revelation through history is God or the cosmic Geist whose embodiment is the universe, with which he is therefore identical and yet not identical. The fullness of this self-revelation will come in speculative philosophy. But like other aspects of the ultimate fruition of Geist, this self-consciousness of the absolute exists and is to be found through history in more rudimentary obscure form.

This form is religion. This self-consciousness of the absolute must, like its ultimate fulfilment in speculative philosophy, be embodied in human consciousness. But Hegel is suggesting that we should see the evolution of religion in human society as more than just the evolution of human consciousness. This of course it is as well, and we have noted various stages of this human religious consciousness in our survey of self-consciousness and Geist – e.g. the unhappy consciousness, or the supra-sensible world. But we must also see this evolution as the development of a larger-than-human consciousness. The justification for this comes, of course, with the validation of the ontological reality of the Hegelian notion of Geist.

Geist’s self-consciousness is inevitably a consciousness of the absolute which underlies all reality. But in its imperfect earlier forms this absolute is not seen as at one with the reality. And in a sense rightly so, for this reality has not yet shaped itself as it will through man’s development in history to be an adequate reflection of the absolute. Hence religious consciousness maintains a distinction between the sacred and the secular, and a tension between them. And by the same token this self-consciousness remains unaware of itself as such, since human consciousness, its vehicle, is seen as something separate from and infinitely below the object of religion.

But the greater the felt gap between sacred and secular, the less adequate the conception of the absolute. This is in reality cosmic infinite subject whose life is embodied in that of finite subject. Hence the religion of the incarnation is the only really adequate one, and even Christianity needs to undergo an evolution and a translation into speculative philosophy in order to overcome the remaining alienation which sees Christ alone as the meeting point of finite and infinite spirit, rather than the community (Gemeinde) as a whole. But preceding this religion we have a series of less adequate ones in history, including conceptions of God as Spirit but as utterly other and separate from finite spirit (Judaism, Islam), or of Gods with human form but lacking universality (Greek religion), and extending back to conceptions where the absolute is no longer seen as Spirit. Hence we will start the dialectic of religious development with what Hegel calls ‘nature religions’, those which see the absolute symbolized through some natural form rather than as free subjectivity.

These lower religions are distinguished as well from the higher in that they have to have recourse to symbolization. Ultimately God is presented to us in the community of finite spirits; there is no symbolization here, God is rather present and evident. This is the hall-mark of what Hegel calls ‘revealed religion’ (offenbare Religion, trading on the connotations of the German word which also means ‘manifest’ or ‘evident’). But when God is not thus evident, then he must be indicated symbolically. The lower the stage of religious consciousness the less adequate the symbolization. Before God is even grasped as spirit, men will use natural phenomena as their symbols.

We see here again that the level of religious consciousness is linked with the level of human development. In the early stages man (finite spirit) is a very inadequate reflection of Geist (infinite spirit). In the stage corresponding for instance to what we saw as sensible certainty, or the dialectic of the master and the slave, on other levels of description, human consciousness has yet to become a vehicle of universal thought; God must be seen as wholly other. At this stage spirit or subjectivity is not even seen as superior to the blind forces of nature, since it is not conceived as universal. Hence it is natural to picture the absolute by some symbol drawn from nature.

We can see thus that the development of religion will recapitulate the developments we have seen at other levels, from a more all-embracing point of view. Stages of consciousness, self-consciousness and Spirit correspond to stages of religion. The PhG thus constantly returns to cover the same ground; but successively from a more central standpoint. Already Spirit represented a shift of standpoint in that we were no longer content to follow the evolution of forms of consciousness in the ordinary sense but saw them embedded in collective life-forms; so that the stages we picked out earlier could be seen as aspects of the stages of spirit. Here again, we shift the standpoint in order to focus on the most fundamental development of all, the growth in self-consciousness of Geist. It would seem that for Hegel the other levels of description yield us aspects of this development; for it is on this level that the basic motor of development is revealed, that we can see in other words, the ultimate rationale behind the stages of history – the drive of Geist towards rational self-revelation. This is perhaps what Hegel means when he says that the descriptions at these other levels are to the description of religious consciousness as predicates to subject (479).

This relation of ‘subject’ to ‘predicate’ should also allow us to understand Hegel’s distinction referred to in the last chapter between religion and faith. The latter is a form of human consciousness which senses a reality beyond it with which it is somehow related. Religion on the other hand englobes those facets of our consciousness which can be understood as the (perhaps confused) self-understanding of Geist. It follows that the same form of consciousness can sometimes be seen from both points of view, as the faith of the individual who sees himself as far below the absolute and pining after an unseen distant reality, and at the same time as a certain stage of religious consciousness still characterized by the rift between sacred and secular.

But the two are not usually congruent. Religion, for Hegel is more all-englobing thing. What reflects a given stage of the self-consciousness of Geist is the whole religious reality, that is, not just the idea of the absolute but also the religious life of the society as lived in their cult. All of this, and not just the theology reflects a certain understanding of the absolute.1 Faith, as a state of mind of an individual, is thus just one element in the religious life of a community at a given stage of civilization. It is simply an abstract aspect, a ‘predicate’. Since the only adequate reflection of Geist is by the common life of a plurality of finite spirits, religious life is always the life of a community, whereas faith as a state of soul is a condition of the individual, however many share it.

It can be guessed from this that Hegel is not terribly concerned with the drama of faith. Indeed, faith as the form of consciousness of the individual who sees himself as separated from the absolute (and hence also from the community [Gemeinde] in which the absolute lives) is the reflection of an as yet unfulfilled religious life. In the ultimate religion of the total self-revelation of Geist, there would be no room for faith. Ideally religion should transcend faith.

2

We start with natural religion, that is, a religion for which the absolute is simply being. As absolute being, it is separate from all particular things; it is the ruler of all and yet untouched by the particularity of things. Thus Hegel sees it represented for instance by early Zoroastrianism, a religion of light and fire: light is pure being in abstraction from all particularity, and fire as that which consumes all particularity.

What is lacking here obviously from a Hegelian point of view is the link between absolute and world, the necessary development of things out of the first principle; without this the world is without necessary structure, just ‘an inessential by-play alongside this substance’ (ein wesenloses Beiherspielen an dieser Substanz, 484). This is the same thing as saying that this substance is not yet subject, for we have seen that subjectivity has this necessary structure whereby its external reality expresses its inner nature.

However, as negative power (Macht) which destroys all particularity, this substance is already in essence a self, and we thus develop normally into a religion of Fürsichsein. But we have not yet got to the idea of a universal self; we are in a stage of many divine beings; and these moreover are very imperfect subjects: men take as their gods plant and animal images.

But the resultant struggle between peoples who follow these different gods leaves nothing in its wake; subjectively as negative power can only destroy. We must therefore move to a higher stage where the transforming power of subjectivity reaches enduring expression through its creations. We have therefore a religion of the artisan. This transition is very reminiscent of that which the slave undergoes in his disciplined work. In effect under external impetus the slave embarks on a course which leads to his own transformation.

And so here with the religion of the artisan, Hegel is here thinking pre-eminently of ancient Egypt.

Instead of just finding the image of his God in nature, the artisan is impelled to form it in stone, in architecture and sculpture. In this way he is already on the road to a higher conception of God since a transformed reality yields us an image closer to that of Spirit than some simply natural being. But in wrestling with his material the artisan is at first not aware that the only adequate image which can satisfy his search is that of free subjectivity. He struggles through a number of intermediate stages in which he represents strange monsters, half-man and half-beast (sphinx) before he finally comes through to the clear representation of spirit which he seeks, viz., the human form. The artisan in struggling with his medium under an impetus which he does not understand is like the slave, and like this latter his transformation of matter is also a transformation of self so that he ends up winning through to higher religion, the religion of art, where men in clarity worship a fully adequate image of spirituality. In other words in transforming their material both slave and artisan reach a higher consciousness which enables them to understand retrospectively the significance of what they were doing, and to work in clear consciousness where before they operated only by instinct or under external compulsion.

This new religion is that of the Greeks, and is the religion of art. We come back here to one of Hegel’s most cherished interpretations. The period of the Greeks is a uniquely happy one in that men come into reconciliation with the absolute, with nature and with society. These three levels are obviously linked. Men see the absolute under the aspect of an anthropomorphic being, as eminently representable by a statue with human form. This reflects the fact that they sense the divine not as something utterly other and fundamentally mysterious and incomprehensible. Rather this sense of the strange and the unfathomable is reflected in the monstrous semi-animal forms given to Gods in other earlier cultures. With the Greeks, says Hegel, these animal forms are set aside or are clearly demoted to simple signs. (493-4). But this at the same time reflects a sense of being at home in the natural world; that the divine in human form has bound the earlier images of the numinous which drew on other natural forms to express their otherness. All this is reflected in the victory over the Titans:

The disordered essence and the confused struggle of the elements’ free existence, the non-ethical realm (das unsittliche Reich) of the Titans, is overcome and banished to the borders of a reality which has become clear to itself, to the troubled frontiers of a world which reposes and finds peace in the Spirit.

(PhG, 494)

But this sense of being‘at home’ is closely bound up with the sense of unity with one’s society which we discussed at the opening of the chapter on spirit. In fact the individual feels himself fully reflected in his society, feels his activity to be simply an embodiment of its ethos, and this ethos to be the substance on which he depends. Now this sense of one-ness with his society mediates the sense of affinity with the divine, for the God in turn is the god of a given people or city, as well as expressing some cosmic reality. Affinity with city and God go together and strengthen each other. Both reflect a certain form of life, that of the free citizen in the state. We are therefore now about to look at the religious consciousness which goes along with the ‘true spirit’ of the last chapter.

But both forms of affinity repose on the same condition which is in the end a fatal flaw. Just as man only identifies with the city by circumscribing this to a particular state and hence by being parochial, so he only feels at one with a divinity who is not absolute subject, but just one divine subjectivity among many. The reconciliation of Greek history is not the final reconciliation, but just a foreshadowing of it; it is destined to pass away undermined by the growth of universal consciousness which is the unavoidable next and higher stage on the road to a total reconciliation of Geist with itself.

It is this growth of the universal individual whose derivation Hegel shows in this section of the chapter on religion. As we have seen elsewhere, the notion of a parochial universal is closely linked with the idea of fate. Above the Gods, the single absolute which is only half-suspected in this religion appears as a force even greater than they; but necessarily as an impersonal force constraining them from without, viz., fate. This will play a part in the derivation in this section, as also will Greek tragedy.

The basic idea behind these derivations is this: the universal must be embodied in some particular form, as we have seen, but this form is always mortal, so that the universal negates it as well as positing it. The only possible reconciliation comes when the particular form fully understands and identifies with this process; when the particular individual recognizes how its mortality is itself an inseparable part of the order which it aspires to embody. In this case, death does not come from outside, it is not something fundamentally other and incomprehensible which descends on it; but rather is in a sense the willed fulfilment of this embodiment itself.

But in the case of a parochial universal, we have an entity which also must be embodied to be, and hence whose embodiment must go under. But being parochial, this universal cannot comprehend within itself the rationale of its own demise. It is therefore wiped out by something other and ununderstood; it perceives this demise as an inscrutable fate.

For the parochial gods of Greece are identified with certain ephemeral realities, like a given city; they are not fully identical with the universal spirit. If they were, then they would be untouched by the demise of given cities, indeed, would understand this demise as necessary for the unfolding of universal spirit. But a parochial universal goes under with the reality to which he is bound; unlike the real universal Geist he does not survive it. Hence the gods are seen as subject to a blind fate, just as men are; whereas later in Christian theology, this will be seen as a divine providence; i.e., ‘fate’ is no longer blind and God is above it.

Similarly the characters of the tragedy are parochial as we saw in the previous chapter; each expresses only part of the universal; hence they too go under in face of a necessity that they cannot understand. And this parochiality of the characters and hence family and state ethics is itself bound up with the parochiality of the city; for it is only in a city based on universal law that these two sources of right cease to conflict and are reconciled.

The reconciliation of Greek civilization is thus doomed to be rent asunder: and yet it has a special beauty and fascination for Hegel. For unlike the higher solution which will succeed it, it is not dependent on fully explicit rational thought. The universal norms of reason can only be brought to fruition in men’s lives by the hard conquest of rational consciousness. True, the reconciliation also exists in representation in the Christian religion which succeeds the Greek; but it cannot come to full expression in history, or even in consciousness without the resources of explicit rational thought.

By contrast the temporary reconciliation of ancient Greece could be embodied completely in spontaneous feeling, and was. Unlike our higher civilization whose basic ideas must be expressed in religion and philosophy, the basis of Greek civilization was expressed in art. Art is the idea in sensuous form; and this is the form which most suited Greek civilization, a reconcilization of Geist with itself based on unreflecting feeling. Its religion was thus the religion of art. Previously, religion still contained deep mystery not fully expressible in its art-forms, and later the higher religion is much more adequately expressed in theology and indeed philosophy. Only the Greeks had a religion whose paradigm expression was in art. Hence the undying charm of the age of ‘art-religion’ (Kunstreligion).

Hegel’s analysis follows the stages by which this art religion breaks down, and its images of the divine lose their substance, and are absorbed into the universal Geist on one hand and the universal self-consciousness on the other. These two are related developments, but Hegel here separates them: the development of Greek religion is seen as the growth of a self-consciousness which has seen through all the claims of the divine and the related ethical claims of public life (Sittlichkeit), and comes to see that human consciousness lies behind all these supposedly higher powers. It reaches an insight something like that of the Enlightenment into the human origin of the gods. This consciousness is that, Hegel thinks, of the comedy of the age of Aristophanes, which treats with irony the claims of gods and demos which were earlier taken as ultimate.

The universal Geist on the other hand is exalted in Jewish religion. And here too it demands a reconciliation with subjectivity, which comes in the Incarnation. This is the second step which is necessary after the first represented in the above development of Greek religion. For it is not enough to debunk the false parochial gods in the name of free self-consciousness; this latter alone is empty unless it can find an external reality which fully reflects what it has become and in which it can thus recognize itself. Left to itself it can only sink in the infinite sense of loss of a desacralized world. But the only external reality which it can accept is one which reflects universal spirit and, what is more, universal spirit in unity with self-consciousness. This it finds in the Incarnation.

But this step is reserved for the next section, that on revealed religion. Let us follow first the stages of art religion. The first reality posited is the expression of the divine, this time in human form, say by a statue. This is the image of the divine as free subjectivity to which man feels an affinity. But as it stands it is not enough, for it is simply an object over against the men whose God it is. Men strive to become one with the God through prayer – and here Hegel once again stresses speech as the medium of external existence of the soul; not in the sense of translating some reality already existent inwardly, but rather of embodying an inter-subjective reality which otherwise would not be. The unity of divine form and the hymn of his worshippers make a new reality, an ‘animate work of art’ (beseeltes Kunstwerk, 496), which is closer to representing the God qua self-conscious subjectivity. We can see here, as was remarked above, how for Hegel religion treats of more than the conceptions of God in theology; here we are dealing with God as lived in the community, God as addressed by his worshippers, rather than just with a static image.

That religion is more than theology is even more evident when we come to cult, which is an essential dimension of religion in Hegel’s eyes.2 Cult is that dimension whereby men strive to become one with God. For all religion contains some inkling that it is the self-consciousness of universal Geist, hence that the finite consciousness is both separate from and at one with the infinite one it worships. Hence the necessity of overcoming the separation and returning to the underlying unity. This is the role of cult.

Hegel cites as cult here the sacrifices of Greek religion. Sacrifice exhibits the two-way convergence of all cult; the finite spirit sets aside his finitude to be one with the infinite; but the infinite also steps down from his merely universal and hence unreal existence and accepts his embodiment in finite Geist. Both these movements are necessary, for finite spirit can only become the adequate embodiment of infinite Geist by overcoming his particularity. The sacrifice of our own to the gods is our act of giving up our particularity; but the god’s descent into the victim, and the return of the victim to us for our consumption, is the stepping of the infinite into finite embodiment.

Religion thus goes way beyond conceptions of the divine to forms of experiencing our unity with the divine, of enjoying our affinity with infinite spirit (Genuß, 504). But simply enjoying the sacrifices is not enough. For the consumed sacrifice disappears. Once again we look for something lasting; and this we find in the ongoing cult of the whole people. We came here to what Hegel calls the living work of art, for instance, in the festival of the whole people, or in the frenzy of maenads possessed, or in the athlete.

But this too rapidly gives way to the third stage; for the living work of art still lacks full consciousness, inward awareness; or insofar as there is inwardness, it is the wild confused and mysterious depth of bacchanalian revel. Hence we proceed to a third stage, the ‘spiritual work of art’, represented by literature.

In this we finally derive the result we have been aiming at, for the three stages of literature, epic, tragedy, comedy, work out the vision and dialectic of what we called above parochial universals to their inevitable outcome.

In the Homeric epic we have gods whose individuality is largely unreal, since they cannot really impinge on each other, being immortal. The underlying idea that their universality can only become real when embodied in human action comes out in the close interweaving of human and divine action in the epic, so that many results seem to spring from both in such a way that one or the other seems superfluous. The gods are here parochial universals, they lack the concrete reality of individual selves; and so do the heroes who are painted here larger than life. But at the same time they are not identical with the truly universal self; they are thus under the sway of fate, for the reason we saw above.

At the same time the really concrete individual, the bard who sings the epic, is outside the story. The next stage is therefore one in which these two extremes, necessity and the concrete individual, come together. This happens in tragedy where the individual character encounters fate not as something contingent and external, but as necessarily flowing from his action. Here Hegel takes up the analysis of tragedy that we saw in the chapter on Spirit. Each character embodies a basic value, that of the city or the family, which cannot but enter into conflict with the other once it is acted upon. Once again, the general underlying principle is that to be embodied and hence active in history is to suffer eventual dissolution; but when acting on truly universal principles, this disolution is something which flows as it were from the action, and does not negate it. Here, however, this is not the case: action thus not only leads to eventual destruction, but to a destruction which is not consonant with the principles of action, which is unreconciled with the action. Rather the action leads to crime in that it offends another law than the one it serves.

Put in other words, one could say that all action is in some sense guilt-creating in that it is affirmation of the particular, and hence cuts him off from the universal. But in the case of action following some universal principle this element of particularity is cancelled, the fault is atoned for, partly by the fact that we are following the principle, and partly through the inevitable and already accepted demise of the agent and his action. Where we have some parochial principle, however, there is really a crime, in that the action violates right not just in the general way of affirming a particular being’s will, but in some specific way. The only atonement possible here is the undoing or renunciation of the act; but since this is enjoined by principle, the agent is in an impossible bind. He goes to a demise with which he is unreconciled, for it signifies the negation of what he stood for not its fulfilment.

Now this external negation is implicit in the parochial act, just as it was in the parochial universals which were the gods of the pantheon. The inner necessity is there all the time, only that in tragedy, it is taken account of; not yet entirely explicitly, but in the sense of necessity expressed in the art form. We cannot quite explain it to ourselves, but we sense the inevitability of the crime. This is also reflected in the dialectic of the known and the unknown. The hero acts on what he knows or is told; but already in his being told, there was an ambiguity which he should have detected. The other side of his action, the right offended by him, is not therefore entirely unknown to him; on some level it is sensed by him, just as we sense the connection; and hence he is not totally blameless.

When this necessity is fully grasped, we rise to a universal subjectivity. But for this subjectivity, the old gods have lost their numinosity. Already tragedy began the process; now they are considered irrelevant. Nature is reduced to what is consumed by the real self-consciousness who enjoys it. Even the claims of city and family to allegiance are undermined when the universal consciousness sees through parochial civic piety, and observe nothing but the ambition of various leaders and the mob. That this is observed is, of course, the fruit not just of a change of consciousness but of an attendant transformation of civic life itself as well.

The religion of art thus ends in the triumph of the self-conscious whose certainty of self makes it master of all it surveys; all universality returns to it, and it recognizes no essence outside itself.

3
Now this cosmic consciousness is at first a happy one; but really it is and will reveal itself to be the unhappy consciousness. We have here the religious consciousness that goes along with the dissolution of the city into the Rechtszustand, the universal state which ruled over atomic individuals whose situation was defined by their rights. This also corresponds to the ideology of Stoicism which was examined in the chapter on self-consciousness.

The basic problem in this phase, however described, is that man has achieved self-certainty but only at the cost of retreating into himself. But since man as Geist must have an external embodiment to be, a self-certainty which is not expressed in external social and political forms is nothing worth. The free universal individual is in fact the plaything of fortune and of unchained forces of political savagery. His self-certainty is a retreat to an inner citadel, that of 1 = 1, which cannot ultimately be defended, and which hence leads to the unhappy consciousness.

In the religious sphere, this basic predicament can be described in the following way: having desacralized the world outside him, the free self-consciousness is in a parlous condition, because he remains dependent on this outside world, it is this which determines his form of life and hence what he effectively is. Simply reducing the divine to self-consciousness as does the debunking insight of the Enlightenment, and the cosmic consciousness of the Ancients, is a self-defeating action. Self-consciousness cannot sustain the prerogative of the divine, of Geist, which is to be fully self in its other, to be the informing necessity underlying a rational world order. On the contrary self-consciousness can only feel abandoned at the mercy of a foreign world, and in so far as it sees salvation describes it from afar, as an unhappy consciousness.

We must therefore return to a renewed sense of the divine as something more than just our self-consciousness. We have to rediscover a cosmic spirit with whom we can be in relation. But we will not simply be returning to our starting point in natural religion; something has been gained, and this is the element of truth behind cosmic consciousness, which is that this cosmic spirit has no other locus of self-consciousness, no other vehicle, than ourselves as finite spirits. He lives in and through us. We are his embodiment. True, as particular individuals we are also in opposition to God or cosmic spirit, we are an embodiment which is also a negation. But this opposition is surmounted in the fact that we are mortal, that each of us plays his part and then dies, while Geist goes on. God repairs the imperfection of his embodiment which reposes in the fact that this embodiment is in finite particular beings by casting aside these beings in his path and hence living his eternal life beyond any given one or number of them. God’s life is something universal which transcends the individual; hence it is only embodied even at one time in a society, a plurality of men, and it is moreover embodied over time and hence through a plurality of such communities.

The ultimate self-understanding of Geist will come in a community which fully understands itself as his vehicle. For this community God will be both separate and above and also not separate and within; and they will be able to grasp both these propositions as true together through speculative reason. This community would also grasp why this has to be so, how God can exist no other way. So that just as man needs God, that is, finite spirits can only achieve integrity through being taken up in his cosmic greater life, so God needs man, that is, infinite spirit is nothing but an abstraction unless embodied in the life of a human community.

It is unclear whether Hegel believed that such a human community based on the total clarity of speculative thought would ever come to be – which is why I used both the future and the conditional in the above passage. But it provides the final term of a process of growth which has to be kept in mind if one is to understand what came earlier. And this is particularly so at the stage we have now reached, for absolute or revealed religion, that is, Christianity, reflects these basic truths albeit in an unclear obscure form, that of ‘representation’ as against thought. The community is the Christian church which lives the life of God through grace. The flowering of the Christian church is thus at least the penultimate stage of the development of Geist, even if we may never fully succeed in going beyond it.

This provides the background for the transition which we now come to. Universal self-consciousness which arises out of the demise of the religion of art feels the need to rediscover cosmic Geist, but cannot simply return to the primitive vision of this Geist as a pre-subjective being, and moreover as one which is quite separate from man. At the same time there is another religious form, which Hegel barely mentions in the PhG but which has an important place in his lectures in the philosophy of religion, and that is Judaism. This too represents a transcending of parochial universals, but at the cost of an uncrossable chasm between man and God. In a sense Judaism and Greek religion are complements: one achieves the affinity of man and God, but at the cost of parochialness; the other achieves true universality but at the cost of denying all affinity.

But this God as spirit quite separate from man cannot be the final resting place for the divine. To see God as so separate is the very paradigm of the unhappy consciousness (and Hegel saw Judaism as such in his early theological writings); in fact God must live his life through men. Hence the need of post-art-religion man to recover the absolute in a way not unrelated to or destructive of self-consciousness, on one hand, and the need of the pure universal spirit of the old testament to find a vehicle in human history, on the other, meet in the Incarnation. It is because the Incarnation meets as it were the needs of both sides, God and man, that it is seen as springing from the collaboration of God and humankind (through Mary).

Hegel insists on the reality of the incarnation as an historic event, and distinguishes it from the various mystery religions which merely imagined the presence of spirit in the world. By contrast in the Christian Incarnation we have God really present in a particular subject, he is ‘a real individual man, given to sensible intuition’ (PhG, 528). Believers can ‘see and feel and hear’ the divinity.3

One might wonder at first how Hegel can make a distinction of this kind within the terms of his own theory. For an sich God is incarnate from the beginning in all men, in this sense, that man is the vehicle of God’s self-consciousness. What changes in history between the earliest nature religions and the final understanding in philosophy is that men become aware of this, or God becomes aware of this through man. But then how can one distinguish an incarnation which is merely imagined (in the mystery religions) from one which really happened? As a fact, an sich, the Incarnation did not happen, it is always true, and not especially true of one man, Christ. As the realization, für sich, that this is so, the Incarnation is indeed an event in human history. How then can we distinguish imagining it as so from its really being so?

But Hegel insists, what is peculiar about the Incarnation is that men did not just come to see it that way, but the substance itself ‘for its own part externalized itself (sich ihrer selbst entäußerte) and became self-consciousness’ (PhG, 526).

The Incarnation is unique in this way: where for earlier religions the divine was often seen as in some sense present in the world, inhabiting in some mysterious way different avatars, for Christianity Jesus is God, there is an identity between this man and God reflected in the theological proposition that this one person has two natures. Hence what the mystery religions imagined is not the same as what the disciples saw. These earlier religions never came to the crucial insight that God as spirit is man; they never got beyond seeing the divine as appearing in various epiphanies – and these occurred in animals, places, etc., as well as in men. Hence for Christianity, God is really there, as a real man in a sense without precedent (527).

Now this point could only be made through the appearance of a unique God-man. In the fullness of speculative thought, we can now grasp the truth that God is identical with each man, and yet non-identical with him as his particularity fails to match the universal nature of God. But at the stage which men then were, the unity of God and man had to be present in immediate sensible intuition. And this point of the identity of man and God could only be made for sensible intuition by a unique God-man, where the singleness of the divine subjectivity is represented in the uniqueness of the Son of God. To see the one God in many incarnations in this stage would be to reduce these to ‘masks which Substance puts on and changes in contingent fashion’, as we see in ‘Indian pantheism’ (AbsRel, 137–8).

However, this point could concern the Incarnation only as divine pedagogy, in the way it appeared to men. It does not yet make sense of Hegel’s claim that something really happened, that substance itself became self-consciousness. To understand this we have to remember that the development of religion in history requires more than that man become aware of his identity with spirit. Or rather, this growth in awareness itself requires that men develop beyond their original raw state, cultivate themselves and acquire a form of life which expresses the universal. Hence for men to be able to see the truth of the Incarnation they had to reach a certain stage of maturity. This is the real happening, the objective correlative of the perception by faith that God has become man. And since this, like all else in history, is the work of Geist, the substance of things, we can speak of this substance itself really becoming self-consciousness.

But this is not enough. Because we are not just talking of a realization of the general truth that God and man are one, rather of the perception that this man, Jesus, was God. Can Hegel be talking of this as an objective event? This seems hard to credit, especially since, if I am right, he did not even believe in the Incarnation in the ordinary sense, since ultimately Jesus is not God in any sense in which all other men are not.

Here we should recall Hegel’s early writings on Jesus. It is very difficult to say for certain, but it is possible that Hegel went on seeing the figure of Jesus as an exceptional and paradigmatic one. In the early writings, Jesus is portrayed as one who manages to unite the divine and the human, the subjective and the external, in a way which is far beyond his time. It is this which leads him to the cross. Can it be, then, that an important part of the objective growth in humanity which Hegel sees as an essential condition of this new religious consciousness consisted in the birth of this exceptional, trail-blazing individual, who really did live in unity with the universal in a way that none other could in his time? Christianity would then require not just a certain maturity among its prospective followers, but also the existence of a man who really was at one with God in a way none of his contemporaries were.

It is very possible that some view of this kind underlay Hegel’s treatment of the Incarnation in the PhG and probably survived into his mature system, even though the spotlight is no more on the figure of Jesus. And if this is so, we can see the important transformation from the early work, which explains this shift of attention. For we no longer have a man-centered view, but one where the ultimate agent of history is Geist. The drama no longer turns on the decisions of the man, Jesus, but on the fact that here Substance becomes self-consciousness.

The Incarnation in this sense is a real event, and also a crucial stage in our religious history. But we have to go beyond it. For while it is true that God is identical with man, as finite spirit, it is also true that he is non-identical with him. And, moreover, God is identical/non-identical with all men, and not just this one individual.

This necessity to transcend the Incarnation is reflected in Christian doctrine itself. For Christ dies, is resurrected, ascends to heaven and sends the holy Ghost. For Hegel all these events belong together. What they reflect is that the unity of God and man cannot be consummated in an individual. For there must always be an opposition between the universal spirit and any particular embodiment. This opposition is resolved, as we saw, when the particular embodiment passes away. Hence the individual must die. But in this case, Christ’s death also signifies the transformation of this unity between God and man from a particular to a universal fact. That is why the death and resurrection are indissolubly linked to Ascension and Pentacost, for the whole meaning of the death lies in the coming of the spirit whereby the locus of Incarnation shifts to the community, the ‘body of Christ’. The whole movement then from Incarnation to Pentacost can be taken on one level as reflecting the necessary tension in the unity of God and man between his embodiment in particular beings and his continuing life beyond these beings. But on another level, the death of Christ involves something special. It reflects the overcoming of the last separation, the last alienation of spirit from itself. God as a pure abstraction has already taken a giant step toward man in becoming incarnate; but in order to become fully realized in man he has to take the other step, that of dying as an incarnate God and therefore cancelling his inherence in a particular time and place, so that the incarnation of God can become that of the community of men in general.

Hegel’s reading of Christian religion and theology can therefore only be understood in the light of this final stage of the community which is the self-conscious vehicle of Geist, the community which is the true man-God. But Christianity has not yet fully realized this. Rather it lives this unity implicitly, but by that very token not fully. For the fullness of Geist’s unity with itself entails clear self-knowledge, since Geist is reason. But Christianity lives this unity still in a muddled and obscure way, in a mode of consciousness which Hegel calls ‘representation’, that is, a mode of awareness which operates with images and symbols and not in the full clarity of conceptual thought. In other words the Christian church lives this unity without really knowing it, and hence necessarily not fully, and that is why it still lives partly in unhappy consciousness. So that the unity is seen as distant in time, in the future of the Parousia, and in the past of the life of Christ.

But as the religion which has finally expressed the true nature of God and his true relation to man, even in unclear form, Christianity can be called ‘revealed religion’, for it is the religion in which Geist truly reveals himself, and moreover reveals himself as a being whose essential nature is self-revelation.4 Thus Hegel sees in Christian theology the whole truth of speculative philosophy laid out in images.

In this section of the chapter Hegel gives one of his interpretations of Christian theology in this sense. The basic notions of speculative philosophy are, as we have seen, that the idea necessarily embodies itself, and then returns to itself out of this estrangement by recognizing itself in this external embodiment. But this is what Christian theology expresses, and expresses moreover on three levels, corresponding each to the three stages of this movement of speculative philosophy.

Now this is doubly fortunate for Hegel himself lays out his system in these three stages: first, one which deals with the idea as a relation of pure categories in abstraction from their embodiment (the Logic), second, a study of the inner necessity visible in external reality (philosophy of nature), and thirdly, the tracing of the return of nature to full self-consciousness through spirit (philosophy of spirit). Corresponding to these, Hegel discerns three levels of theology, which he identifies with the Joachimite messianic language, later taken up by Böhme, of the realms respectively of father, son and holy ghost.

On the first level we have the doctrine of the trinity, representing as it were, God’s relation with himself; and this reflects the speculative tri-partite movement: God the father, who begets the son as his other; and who is united with him in love by the Holy Ghost.

But this level calls for another, the exteriorization represented by the begetting of the son calls for a real counterpart, the creation of real exteriority, and this comes in the creation of the world. This includes the creation of finite spirit. But finite spirit, in order to become truly spirit, has to come to self-consciousness (insichgehen, 537). And in doing so he becomes aware of a self over against the rest of the world and infinite spirit. This affirmation of self is original sin, it is the birth of evil. But at the same time it is inevitable, for otherwise there could be no finite spirit. And it is thus in the plan of God, for without finite spirit there would be no infinite spirit. It is necessary for finite spirit, since spirit is necessarily consciousness of self, and since it is embodied in particularity, its self-consciousness will inevitably be a raising to separate consciousness of particularity. The only way of avoiding this would be for man to remain sunk in nature, unconscious of self like an animal, and hence below both good and evil (innocent, says Hegel, but not good, 537). That is why the fall is the moment where men acquire knowledge of good and evil.

So much is the fall in the plan of Geist, that the only antidote for the evil of concentration in self is more of the same, a deeper and deeper self-consciousness until men arrive at a grasp of the universal in themselves. But we come here to the third stratum of theology, that which deals with the redemption. And here as we have seen, the reconciliation proceeds from both ends: God strives to be one with men, and men strive to overcome their particularity to be one with God. The reflection of this process comes in the theology of the Incarnation, death, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ, the coming of the Holy Ghost and the continuing life of the church, as we saw. God comes to man through the Incarnation and death, man to God through the self-transformation in his life in the community. But we have as yet not completely consummated this movement, since the separation is still felt, and reflected in the fact that the unity is only grasped by representation, and is put off into the future and the past, instead of being recognized in the present.

But underneath this representation we can recognize the true speculative doctrine. Speculative relations of necessity are deformed by being represented in such images as ‘begotten’ or ‘created’; but nevertheless, these relations are recognized. And in the mutual approach of God and man, the pure universal which must accept unity with the particular in order to be effectively, and the particular which must rise above its particularity to the universal, we recognize the relation of the two consciousnesses which was the culmination of the previous chapter, the relation between evil and its forgiveness, the acting and judging consciousness. The active consciousness incurs evil inevitably, this is the essence of the doctrine of original sin; but the universal which is sinned against cannot exist except at this price; it therefore must accept realization at the hands of the individual, and ‘forgive’ this individual his particularity, which the latter for his part repents. In this way the two extremes come to unity.

These two extremes are now seen to be, after the development of this chapter, God and man, and we see that the dialectic of evil and its forgiveness is a cosmic one whose resolution gives us the ultimate key to reality. This ultimate reality is a self-knowing cosmic Geist, and we have thus also reached the highest form of consciousness – or rather, the threshold of this highest form; for what is represented in revealed religion through representation, must still be expressed in the full clarity of speculative thought. To have achieved this is to have achieved absolute knowledge.

 

 

1 This distinction between religion as a whole life-form and theology plays an important role in Hegel’s thought from the beginning, as we saw in Chapter II in the discussion of the MS-fragments of his Tübingen period.

2 As we shall see below in Chapter VIII. Cf. BRel.

3 Cf. AbsRel, 133,141, where Hegel also insists that God must take the form of ‘immediate, sensible intuition’ for men, that he must be ‘seen and experienced in the world’.

4 Here again the distinction between religion and faith is relevant. As a total life-form, the Christian religion lived in the Church is here unity of God and man. But the consciousness of faith still sees God as separate.

 
    