## CHAPTER IX
## A Dialectic of Categories
 

 

The Logic exists in two versions, the Science of Logic, which Hegel first published in 1812–16 and partially revised for a second edition just before his death; and the first part of the system of Science, often called the Encyclopaedia, published first in 1817 and afterwards revised as well. I shall draw on both of these (respectively WL and EL) in what follows.

The Logic is the second of the great derivations of Hegel’s vision, and a crucial one as we have seen, because it is the only real candidate for the role of strict dialectical proof. If the real exists and has the structure it has by conceptual necessity, then the task of the Logic is to show this conceptual structure by pure conceptual argument.

This may sound mad to ordinary consciousness and indeed to most philosophers. For we think of our concepts as instruments of our thought which may or may not apply adequately to reality. We start off, that is, with a notion of thought as over against the world about which we think. This dualism is linked to another; since a concept or a category is thought of as a universal which can apply to many contents, we are tempted to think of it as an abstract form over against the sensible contents to which it applies.

This double dualism naturally leads us to think that a study of concepts is quite distinct from a study of reality; and more particularly, that the necessary relations between concepts which we may discover from such a study in no way allow us to conclude to necessary relations among the things to which they apply. Logic, as a study of these relations is thus necessarily formal, touching our way of thought, and not the contents that we think about.

But Hegel as we see does not accept this notion of the concept and the two dualisms it entails. Thought and the determinations through which it operates (the Denkbestimmungen, or categories) are not the apanage of a subject over against the world, but lie at the very root of things. For the reality which we perceive as finite subjects is the embodiment of Geist or infinite subject. But the life of Geist is rational thought, a life which is carried in our own thought, i.e., that of finite subjects, and is adequately expressed in so far as we think rationally. The rational, truly universal thought which is expressed in our categories is thus spirit’s knowledge of itself. Since the external reality to which these categories apply is not only an embodiment of Geist, but is posited by Geist as its embodiment, and hence reflects the rational necessity of thought, in grasping the categories of thought about things, we are also grasping the ground plan or essential structure to which the world conforms in its unfolding.

So much for the first dualism, that which opposes our concepts and the world to which they apply. On the contrary, the ultimate understanding of the world of things comes when we see it as existing in order to embody the rational structure which is expressed in these categories. But this also puts paid to the second dualism; for once we see the world as posited by Geist, a spirit whose life is thought, then we see the categories of thought as necessarily embodied, as ‘going over’, as it were, into their embodiment. So that the idea of opposing concepts as forms to the things they apply to as contents turn out to be profoundly mistaken.

Hence the Hegelian notion of concept, which as we have seen is not just a descriptive notion applying to things but that which posits the things to which it applies. So that the concept is ultimately assimilated by Hegel to the subject, a spiritual being which posits its own embodiment. In fact, the concept is just spiritual subject when we see it in its aspect as rational necessity.

Hegel makes clear in the introduction to the Logic that he is not treating concepts as they are normally treated, but rather in his sense, as straddling the opposition between subject and object. That this opposition must be overcome he takes as the already established conclusion of the PhG. In this latter work we showed that the ‘opposition of consciousness’ (sc. between subject and world) is overcome (WL, I, 30, 32). Pure knowledge ‘contains thought in so far as it is itself just as much the matter thought about [die Sache an sich selbst], and the matter thought about in so far as it is just as much pure thought’ (WL, I, 30). It teaches us ‘that what exists an und für sich is the known Concept, while the Concept as such is that which exists an und für sich’ (WL, I, 30–1).

The title ‘Logic ‘is therefore very misleading if we have in mind the formal logic with which we are familiar. But in fact Hegel is using the title here in the sense of Kant’s ‘transcendental logic’. Beside ‘general’ (i.e., formal) logic, which ‘treats of the form of thought in general’ (Critique of Pure Reason, A55, B79), Kant elaborated a transcendental logic which ‘concerns itself with the laws of understanding and of reason solely in so far as they relate a priori to objects’ (CPR, A57, B82). This logic brings to light certain necessities of our thought, which are not just concerned with its formal consistency but with the conditions of its empirical validity. The transcendental logic thus defines what Kant calls the categories, the necessary and inescapable conceptual structures which the world of experience must exhibit if we are to have any experience at all.

But then a transcendental logic comes very close to being an ontology. To say that certain conceptual structures must apply to the world is surely to say something about the nature of things. Kant avoids this conclusion by distinguishing between phenomena, the objects of experience, and things as they are in themselves, beyond our experience. The categories tell us only about the world as it must be for us, but justify no conclusions about the world of things in themselves.

But Hegel as we know emphatically rejects the Kantian distinction between phenomena and noumena. In the introduction to WL, as also to EL, he inveighs against Kant for propounding the idea of an unknowable Ding-an-sich. True, Kant deserves some credit for having gone beyond formal to transcendental logic. But he spoiled it all by restricting its conclusions to the world-as-known-by-us in contrast to the world as it is in itself. Hegel is going to offer us a transcendental logic which will also be an ontology. He will do away altogether with the epistemological beyond which the Ding-an-sich inhabits.

Thus in discovering the necessary relations between the categorial concepts of a transcendental logic, we will also be discovering the necessary structure of reality. But one might reply, this just displaces the problem; granted that knowing the necessary relations among categorial concepts is knowing the necessary structure of things, how do we go about establishing these necessary relations? Where do we start? What can we select as a categorial concept in the meaning of the act?

But in fact, Hegel would reply, this last is not a problem. Start anywhere. Take as category any one of those very general terms by which we try to designate a pervasive aspect of reality – ‘being’, ‘cause’, ‘substance’, ‘quantity’, etc. In fact Hegel starts with ‘being’ the category of ‘simple immediacy’ (WL, 54), because it seems the emptiest and poorest; it thus presupposes nothing but that there is thought of reality. And it is for this reason also the farthest from the terminus he is heading for, the notion of spirit; he will thus pass through all the other categories on the way.

So starting with ‘being’, we have to show the necessary relations among categorial concepts. But how do we proceed? By showing the dialectical movement in these concepts. Dialectical movement is based as we saw on contradiction. So what we have to show is that our categorial concepts as we ordinarily understand them, unrelated by rational necessity, are in some way contradictory; and that this contradiction can only be resolved (or, in fact, reconciled) by seeing them as linked in a rational structure.

So we start with a single concept, for instance ‘being’, and our task is to show that taken on its own, it generates a contradiction. This of course does not leave us nowhere; being a specific contradiction it will call for some specific change or enrichment of the concept, and we will thus arrive at a new category. And from this point a new dialectic can start. We are already familiar with this aspect of the Hegelian dialectic where each contradiction has a definite result (WL, I, 36–7).

But how does one show a contradiction in a single categorial concept? How do we show that ‘being’ or ‘quality’ or ‘cause’, for instance, are incoherent? It is clear that we are not talking about empirical conflict with the facts. And nor are we talking about a simple contradiction within the meaning of an expression, such as we have with ‘round squares’, for instance. Rather we are concerned with a contradiction which shows up when we use the concept as a categorial one, that is, as a concept which applies to reality in general.

Once more we see a precedent for what we are trying to define in Kant. In the Kantian antinomies we find contradictions which arise when we attempt to apply certain concepts in a pervasive way, that is, to the full extent of their possible application. The logic of these concepts seems to licence two contradictory assertions. Thus in applying the notions of division of space and time in a systematic way, or in applying that of limit to the whole, or in using the related notions of causation and freedom to their full legitimate extent, we seem driven by our understanding of these concepts to make two utterly unreconcilable assertions, which both seem equally well founded.

Kant, says Hegel, deserves our gratitude for having laid bare these antinomies, but he drew totally the wrong conclusions. For he still shared the error of understanding in opposing thought to reality, and out of a misplaced ‘tenderness for wordly things’ (EL, § 48) he sought the basis of these antinomies in the limits of our understanding, and not in the real nature of things. Hegel adds that Kant only scratched the surface in designating four antinomies (loc. cit., also WL, I, 183–4). In fact our categorial thought is shot through with them. ‘Becoming, Determinate Being, etc., and every other concept could each provide its particular antinomy, and as many antinomies could be set up as concepts were brought forward.’ (WL, I, 184).

The Kantian antinomies are thus just examples of something more pervasive in Hegel’s eyes. Our categorial concepts when we consider them as descriptions of reality as a whole or of pervasive aspects of this reality show a crucial inadequacy. And this lands us in a contradiction. For these categorial concepts are inescapable; they are meant to designate indispensable aspects of reality if there is to be a reality for us at all. If then these concepts portray a reality which is in some sense impossible or incoherent, we are caught in a contradiction: the seemingly indispensable descriptions of reality portray a reality which cannot be.

This is the process operative in the Kantian antinomies Hegel thinks, and he holds that it has much wider application. So portrayed the Hegelian dialectic of categories seems to require two separate lines of argument: the first showing that a given category is indispensable (as Kant does in the transcendental logic), the second showing that it leads us to a characterization of reality which is somehow impossible or incoherent. But in fact Hegel fuses these together. Here we see from another angle the advantage of starting with ‘being’. No one can deny that this concept must apply to anything which can be a reality for us. Then our dialectical argument by showing a contradiction in ‘being’ deduces the next category (in this case, ‘determinate being’). This new category is thus shown to be indispensable, since it is introduced as the only way to resolve the contradiction in the earlier category, ‘being’, which was taken as indispensable. In other words, if ‘being’ must apply, then ‘determinate being’ must as well, since it is the only way of making sense of ‘being’. So the dialectical argument in deducing a definite outcome to each contradiction doubles up as a transcendental logic: in showing the incoherence of one concept, it demonstrates the indispensability of the next.

But how do we show that a given concept portrays an impossible reality? What gives us the inner complexity which we have seen is essential for the dialectic? What is the ‘standard’ against which we can measure the concept? The answer is that we know certain criterial properties which any conception of reality as a whole must meet, e.g., that we be able to distinguish reality from non-being, that reality sustain itself against what negates it, and thus be capable of continued existence, that reality as a whole be self-subsistent, etc. We thus have the same three-termed relation that we saw in the last chapter was essential to the Hegelian dialectic: a concept of reality comes into conflict with the criterial properties of such a concept when we try to ‘realize ‘it, that is, apply it systematically to the world. Qua concept of reality, it conflicts with its own criterial properties. And hence any reality which meets this concept must be in conflict with itself.

Now the contradiction in Hegel’s Logic comes from the fact that certain concepts are both indispensable and incoherent: that is, as concepts of reality they are in conflict with their own criterial properties; and yet being indispensable they must be instantiated. This is the key to Hegel’s enterprise and it is worth looking at a little more closely.

If a concept were just incoherent, then it could be set aside in favour of a more adequate one. Or if while indispensable, it was just inadequate as against incoherent, there would be no conflict in complementing it with a fuller one. Now some of Hegel’s transitions seem to be based on simple inadequacy, for instance that which occupies the first chapter of the Logic, from Being to Determinate Being. The contradiction is between the concept’s claim to adequacy and its de facto inadequacy (or so one can plausibly argue; Hegel sees more in it than this). There is no claim that the concept must be realized precisely in the respect in which it is inadequate, i.e., that there must be a reality which conflicts with the adequate conditions of its existence, that is, a contradictory reality.

But this stronger claim is made in other transitions, for instance that between Determinate Being and Infinity, in Chapter II of the Logic, which plays a key role in the argument of the whole work. Here it is not just that determinate Being as limited is inadequate as a concept of reality and requires to be completed by a notion of the whole. Hegel also will try to show that this inadequacy is an inner conflict, in which determinate reality will not accept its inadequacy, its defining limits, and in struggling against them, fights against itself. We might say that in this case the criterial properties of reality are in conflict with each other. Reality is in contradiction.

But how can reality be in contradiction? How in other words can concepts be both incoherent and instantiated?

For Hegel, this poses no problem, as we are now aware. For reality is incoherent, that is prey to contradiction. What the inadequate categories correspond to is inadequate, partial reality, which both necessarily exists (hence the categories are indispensable), and yet being contradictory necessarily goes under (hence the categories are incoherent). We are thus not dealing with a dialectic of illusion where we cut through false conceptions which are justly consigned to oblivion once we arrive at the truth; but rather with a dialectic of reality. It follows that our finally adequate category, which Hegel calls the Idea, will not be beyond the earlier categories, making no reference to them, but will incorporate them. This category will rather exhibit the necessary connection of the whole ascending chain of categories, whereby the lower as indispensable and incoherent can only have application in relation to the higher, because the reality they designate can only exist as a necessary but self-cancelling embodiment of the Idea.

This then is how we exhibit a necessary conceptual structure of things. We show that our indispensable categorial concepts are contradictory. But as contradictory each is necessarily related to another which resolves the contradiction at its level. Hence we have a necessary relation founded on a contradiction. And this suits Hegel’s ontology perfectly. A given categorial concept is indispensable yet incoherent. This means that the partial reality it designates both must exist and yet destroy itself. But this can only be because the higher reality, designated by the higher category which resolves the contradiction at this level, also exists, and this partial reality is kept in being by its inherence in this higher reality. A partial reality which continually destroys itself can only go on existing if it is continually posited by the larger order of which it is part. Thus the fact that we move through the chain of conceptual necessity by contradictions and their resolutions means that the lower terms are related to the higher as posited by them (because they depend on them to exist), yet necessarily posited (for these terms are indispensable), and just as necessarily disappearing, (because they are contradictory). But this exactly mirrors Hegel’s ontology, where the larger whole, or absolute, necessarily issues in partial, external reality, which qua expression of the absolute is contradictory and must go under.

Does Hegel in fact make good this claim to show reality as contradictory? The reader will have to judge in studying the Logic. I do not believe so. But this is not to say that the arguments of the Logic fail altogether. On the contrary, the work is a tissue of powerful arguments which show the weakness of other philosophical positions. But Hegel tries at crucial moments to force them further, to make them yield his ontological vision. And it is here that they fail as arguments. What Hegel does succeed in doing is to portray the structure of things as offering ‘traces and hints’ of his vision of embodied spirit. The suggestion is sometimes powerful, but at the crucial points it falls short of conceptual proof.

The Logic thus presents the chain of necessarily connected concepts which give the conceptual structure of reality. This allows us to answer more satisfactorily the question posed above of what Hegel considers a categorial concept. Starting from the poorest, most general and most irrecusable general concept, ‘being’, the chain of concepts which is generated in the dialectical movement will constitute the list of categories, i.e., those general concepts indispensable for a description of reality. That seems to be the idea. In fact the practice is somewhat different. As in other dialectics, Hegel is anxious to take in all the terms which could plausibly be thought of as categorial and others besides which are essential to his ontology. The dialectic moves in such a way as to link these into its conceptual chain, which means that the transitions are not always compelling, and there are many detours to take in essential matter, where one might have expected an immediate leap to a higher category.

The Logic shows a necessary conceptual structure of reality based on contradiction. It shows that contradiction belongs to the very nature of our categories (Denkbestimmungen, WL, I, 38). They move themselves, and thus show that they are at base concept (Begriff) in the full Hegelian sense, i.e., self-embodying subjects. What the Logic gives us therefore is the basic formula of rational necessity which embodies itself and thus is manifest in the universe.

Thus the formula presented in the Logic is in a sense the inner kernel of Geist’s self-knowledge, God’s inner intellectual life, or as Hegel puts it somewhat misleadingly (WL, I, 31) it is ‘the presentation of God…as he is in his eternal essence before the creation of nature and finite spirit.’1 If we disregard the interpretation of this ‘before’ as temporal, which would clash with what we have seen to be the essential notions of Hegel’s ontology, we can see this as another expression of the idea that the Logic provides us a picture of the conceptual formula of rational necessity that is the essence of Geist, or God. It shows us God in his inner nature, as it were, rather than as we may see him reflected in nature and history. An essential vision, but not sufficient by itself.

 

 

1 ‘Die Darstellung Gottes…, wie er in seinem ewigen Wesen vor der Erschaffung der Natur und eines endlichen Geistes ist’.

 
    