## CHAPTER XVI
## The Realized State
1
PR explores what flows from the notion of rational will concerning human affairs. It goes beyond a simple political theory. It turns out to englobe also what Hegel calls civil society, and the family. But also it discusses the dimension of morality and private rights.1

Hegel intends to proceed from the most abstract to the most concrete. He will end with a picture of the state, because this is the highest embodiment of Sittlichkeit, which is implicit in the notion that man is the vehicle of rational will.

But we start off with the notion of private rights. Man is a bearer of private rights because he is essentially a vehicle of rational will. As such he commands respect. Man is a bodily existence who has to have commerce with the external world in order to live; he has to appropriate things and use them. But this fact becomes a value because man is the essential vehicle of the realization of reason or spirit, which is the same thing as saying that man is endowed with will. Hence man’s appropriation is to be seen as in fulfilment of the ontologically grounded purpose. It is something infinitely worthy of respect. Thus the de facto process of appropriation becomes the de jure right to property. Man is a bearer of rights because as a will he is worthy of respect. An attack on his external bodily existence or his property is thus a crime, an attack against the very purpose underlying reality as a whole, including my own existence. The right of appropriation over things comes from the fact that these have no inherent ends; they are given to them by will. Will has the rights (PR, § 44).

Hegel thus justifies the right to property. He sees this as a right to private property. For this right falls to man in the abstract, as an individual rational will. This is because it is on this immediate, individual level than man is related to things, that he is in interchange with nature.2 Man is also part of a community of Sittlichkeit, but this touches him at another, higher level than this commerce with things. It touches his identification, his spiritual life, that for which he should be ready to give up life and property.

Hence in property we are dealing with the will of man as a single individual, as a person (PR, § 46). Of course, this very basic consideration of man as a person, bearer of abstract right, although the starting point for the Logic-derived exposition of the PR, is not the point of departure, historically speaking. A long development was necessary before man was actually first considered in history as a person, as we saw in our consideration of the philosophy of history above. This occurred in the Roman world.

Hegel then goes on to consider a number of other matters related to rights, particularly property rights; for instance, contract, and crime and punishment. Crime, says Hegel, taking up a theme we saw in the Logic is a negative infinite judgement. It is not just saying, as it were, this particular thing is not mine, which my rival in a civil suit says; it denies the whole category of ‘mine’ and ‘thine’.

Crime is an attack on the very purpose underlying things, the purpose even of the criminal, his will an sich (PR, § 100). Punishment has as goal to undo this rebellion against the purpose of things. This attack has come from a will which has set itself against the very principle of will. The undoing must therefore be a counter-injury against the particular will of the criminal

The sole positive existence which the injury possesses is that it is the particular will of the criminal. Hence to injure (or penalize) this particular will as a will determinately existent is to annul the crime, which otherwise would have been held valid, and to restore the right.(PR, §99)

Hegel is therefore quite out of sympathy with the various liberal theories of punishment as preventive, deterrent, reformative, etc. And he opposes the softening of the penal code which springs from this kind of philosophy. In particular, he is opposed to the abolition of capital punishment. In an important sense if the punishment is to undo the crime it has to ‘fit the crime’. To let someone off on the grounds that punishment is reformative is not to treat man with the full dignity of a bearer of will, whose will can thus incarnate wrong, and hence cry for punishment. It is treating him ‘as a harmful animal who has to be made harmless’ (PR, § 100). Punishment is a right of the criminal. He calls for it with his will an sich.

The exploration of what is involved in man’s being rational will has led us first to see him as the bearer of rights, as such, as a person, outside of specific political contexts. But now we go farther. As will he not only has rights, but he has the duty to determine himself. He determines himself by giving a content to his will; and this should be a rational, universal content. This is the sphere of morality.

Man is a moral agent because as a bearer of will he ought to conform his will to universal reason. Man as a willing being is first of all a natural being, seeking the fulfilment of his own inclinations, needs, passions. But he has to purify his will and make the rationally conceived good his goal.

But as the subject of morality man still figures as an individual. The demand of morality is that I come to recognize that I am under the obligation of willing universal reason, simply in virtue of being a man. And this means as well that I come to this realization myself, by my own reason. The subject of morality is the universal subjectivity which rose on the ruins of the ancient city.

The demands of morality in other words are inner as well as outer. It is not enough that I do the right thing. If the requirement is that I conform my will to universal reason, then I must not only do what is right, but will the right as the right. In other words I have to do the right because it is the right; and it folllows from this that I have to understand the right myself. This is, of course, what Kant made central to morality, following a hint of Rousseau’s: morality consists in the purity of the will, and this is considered by Hegel to be the highest expression of this category. Morality touches our intentions and not just our acts.

But this, of course, is radically incomplete for reasons which are now familiar to us. Morality needs a complement in the external world, a world of public life and practices where it is realized. For without this it remains a pure aspiration, a pure ought to be (Sollen) as Hegel puts it. It remains something purely inner. But there is more than that. The concept of rational will alone, as the will of an individual, is ultimately vacuous, as we saw in Chapter XIV. We cannot derive a content from the notion of duty for duty’s sake (PR, § 135). It is only as ontological reason, which seeks its own embodiment in a community with a certain necessary structure, that rationality yields a criterion of the good. The content of the rational will is what this community requires of us. This then is our duty. It is not derived from formal reason but from the nature of the community which alone can embody reason.

Hence morality, the individual’s search to conform his will to universal reason, refers us beyond itself both in order to complete its own attempt of deriving the right from reason, and in order to realize this right effectively. The demands on man as a bearer of rational will are thus that he live in a community which embodies reason, which is the fulfilled goal of reason. That is, what is implicit in the concept of man as a vehicle of rational will is only fully realized in such a community.

The two earlier stages thus refer us beyond to the concept of Sittlichkeit which is the third and major part of PR. Right is inadequate because it is simply the external expression of the fact that man is a bearer of will. It has no interiority. Besides it too requires to be defended by political power. By itself it is powerless. Morality shows a dimension of human life which answers one of the lacks of right; it shows human moral life as an inner purification of the will. But it cannot reach its goal of deriving the fullness of human moral duties from reason, nor realize these unless it is completed by a community in which morality is not simply an ‘ought’, but is realized in the public life. Thus right and morality find their place and are secured as parts of a larger whole.

But one essential feature of morality must be preserved in this community as it arises in its mature form in history. It must not as the earlier city-state have no place for moral man. On the contrary the basic freedom of moral man as man, the freedom to judge in conscience, must be preserved. This is an essential requirement of a Sittlichkeit which can incorporate modern man and with which he can identify himself. For the modern state, therefore, conscience is a sanctuary not to be violated (PR, § 137). Man retains this reflective dimension and this is why he cannot recapture the immediate unity and identity of the citizens with the state characteristic of the polis. But this is not to say that the modern or any state can allow men to decide by conscience alone whether to obey the laws. It means rather that freedom of conscience is an essential right in the modern state.

We thus come to Sittlichkeit which is substantial freedom in Hegel’s terms. It is realized good. Men identify with it. It becomes their ‘second nature’ (PR, § 151), and they are its effective realization in subjectivity.

The sittlich is what has to do with a community in which the good is realized in a public or common life. Hence the category englobes more than the state. And Hegel will deal with three forms of common life in this section, which are also placed in an ascending order: the family, civil society and the state.

The first is an immediate unreflecting unity based on feeling. The second is society in so far as it conforms to the vision of the modern atomist theories of contract, a society of individuals who come together out of mutual need. Radically inadequate as a theory of the state, this vision is realized in Hegel’s view in the modern bourgeois economy. Civil society is modern society seen as an economy of production and exchange between men considered as subjects of needs. This is at the antipodes of the family, for here there is no immediate unity but maximum consciousness of individuality in which men are bound together by external ties.

The state comes to complete this trio. For it offers once more a deeper unity, an inward unity, like the family. But it will not be just an immediate one based on feeling. Rather unity here is mediated by reason. The state is a community in which universal subjectivities can be bound together while being recognized as such.

First the family is a unity of feeling, of love. Men sense themselves as members within a family, not as persons with rights vis-à-vis each other. When rights enter into it, the family is dissolving. In this section Hegel deals with marriage, family property and the education of children. The main point of the family as sittlich is this fact that within it men see themselves as members of something greater, as having identity by their part in a common life.

But of course the family is quite inadequate alone as Sittlichkeit, for within it man is not really an individual and the allegiance to the common life is not founded on reason but on feeling only. Hence beyond the family, man is in another community in which he operates purely as an individual. This is what Hegel calls civil society.

Civil society is the society considered as a set of economic relations between individuals. Hegel had read and carefully considered the writings of the British political economists, most notably James Steuart and Adam Smith, whose works had been translated into German. His model of civil society owes a lot to these writers.

Civil society is the level of relations into which men enter not as members of family, nor as members of some ethical community, such as a state or a church, but just as men. It is a sphere in which men are related to each other as persons in Hegel’s sense, i.e., as bearers of rights. In this sphere ‘a man counts as a man in virtue of his humanity alone, not because he is a Jew, Catholic, Protestant, German, Italian, etc’ (PR, § 209 E).

In the level of social relations called civil society, men are thus individuals on their own; their relations to each other are founded on the fact that in fulfilling their needs they require each other. In other words, in this sphere we look at men as the subjects of individual purposes; they become related through these individual purposes whose fulfilment requires social co-operation.

Civil society can be thus looked on first of all as a system of needs. Men have needs which they try to fulfil by work and effort. But in so doing they need the work and effort of others. They have to enter into exchange. But this system of needs is not something static. The difference between men and animals is that the former go beyond a single set of species needs which are the same and remain the same for all specimens throughout time. On the contrary man exhibits his transcendence and universality (PR, § 190) in multiplying his needs and the means of satisfying them. This multiplication of needs is intensified by social comparison; men emulate others, and desire certain things because they come to be conditions of others’ esteem. Here Hegel touches on a Rousseauian theme, but what for Rousseau was taken as the basis of decadence and evil in man is seen by Hegel as a necessary part of the development of reason. The Rousseauian view was indeed right in the ancient world where society could not cope with the growth of self-consciousness and the search for individual good. The simple unity with the whole was destroyed by this. But the modern state is capable of reconciling individual subjectivity and the universal. It does not therefore need to fear the multiplication of needs.

Needs can multiply without end. But in doing so they force an even more intense social co-operation. The greater production needed requires a farther-reaching division of labour. It also pushes man to greater work; and hence to work in more complex relations and systems of interdependence. This helps to form man, to educate him to the universal.

For the more intense and complex the social co-operation, the more man in working to satisfy his own needs is also working to satisfy the needs of all others. Hegel here (PR, § 199) takes up the famous Smith thesis of the invisible hand, and sees in it an example of the cunning of reason. It is a ‘dialectical movement’ which takes individual self-seeking and makes it into the fulfilment of others’ needs. Smith’s invisible hand thus represents the force of the universal here, and this is what Hegel means when he says that this sphere is the sphere of the individual in which universality is only abstract. It is not a living force in men’s allegiance that binds them together in co-operation, but rather an external mechanism.

So far Hegel’s portrait of civil society is closely based on the utilitarians and classical economists; and we can see already what part this plays in his system. This level of social life expresses the dimension of man as an individual, that which destroyed the old Sittlichkeit of the city-state. But it represents an incontestable advance and an essential dimension for men. For it is the level on which man stands as an individual seeking his own fulfilment, and yet as an individual he does not remain within narrow horizons. Rather he is swept up in the ever-widening system of division of labour and exchange. His wants are refined and cultivated in this society, and he learns to produce, within his speciality, not just for himself but for the world market. He is educated to universality. Civil society is the essential embodiment, one might say, material base, of modern universal subjectivity and is therefore ineradicable, even though as we shall see it is inadequate and has to be supplemented by a higher level.

But Hegel now goes on to develop traits of civil society (PR, § 201-7) which properly belong to his own ideas. He argues for the necessary articulation of civil society into classes or estates. The necessary division of labour gives rise to groups (allgemeinen Massen, PR, § 201) which have not just a different type of work, but also different life-styles and hence values. These are the Hegelian ‘estates’ (Stände). Hegel uses the older term, rather than class, and it is better to follow him here since these groups are not just differentiated by their relation to the means of production, but by their life-style.

Hegel singles out three: the substantial or agricultural class which lives close to nature and which is generally unreflective, living rather ‘an ethical life which is immediate, resting on family relationship and trust’ (PR, § 203); the reflecting or business class which really lives the life of individuality, that is which has the orientation to the fulfilment of individual needs through rationalized work. This is the class which is most saliently identified with civil society as a system of needs. Thirdly, there is the universal class; this is the class of civil servants which identifies itself with the interests of the community as a whole.

We see here Hegel’s notion of the inescapable differentiation of society which underlay his critique of the French Revolutionaries and their attempt to abolish differences in a regime of total participation. Because men in order to fulfil their needs cannot but differentiate themselves in this way, a polity which tries to abstract from this is bound to come to grief. But the differentiation is not simply to be understood as a by-product of the division of labour; we can also see in it by anticipation the structures of rational necessity.

The three classes represent each a dimension which must be present in the modern state. There must be the sense of allegiance to a whole which is above and greater than oneself, the dependence on something bigger; this the substantial class has in an unreflecting way. There must be a sense of the individual as a universal subjectivity; this the business class has. There must finally be a reasoned identification with the universal in a will which embodies this universal; and this the class of civil servants has. These three classes can also be lined up against the three levels of Sittlichkeit: family, civil society and state.

One of the crucial points of Hegel’s philosophy is his belief that these three cannot be brought to synthesis by being present in all citizens and harmonized in each of them. Rather the synthesis is achieved by a community in which the different dimensions are carried primarily by a specific group; but where these are bound together and live a common allegiance to the whole. A state in which everyone is immediately identified with the principle of common life in the same way, this was possible among the ancients, but not with the more complex moderns. Today, we unite individuality and identification with the state by an articulation into estates where these different dimensions respectively are preponderant, and yet where all have a sense of common life, and recognize that they are part of a larger whole.

What underlies this belief that each man cannot realize the total synthesis is on one level the Hegelian insight that in order effectively to realize a value a man has to be deeply immersed in it. ‘A man actualizes himself only in becoming something definite, i.e., something specifically particularized’ (PR, § 207). He strongly endorsed Goethe’s dictum: ‘wer großes will muß sich zusammenraffen’ (whoever would achieve something great must concentrate himself). The spiritual scope of modern society is too great for one man; he cannot fully realize it all in his life. Hence men must particularize: the synthesis must come from the fact that each in his particularization senses himself as part of a larger common life.

And here we meet the second level of Hegel’s philosophical grounding for this belief: the whole must itself exhibit the ontological structure of reason. But for this it must be differentiated. For reason itself or the Idea differentiates itself in order to recover unity out of difference. Not to be differentiated is a primitive phase, like that of the seed, out of which flows a difference which returns back to itself. Thus the immediate unity of the Greek polis marks it as a primitive stage; the very differentiation of the modern state shows its maturity.

Thus society must be articulated into Stände. But in this the principle of the modern world, the freedom of choice of the individual must be respected. Within the bounds of external factors governing opportunity, the individual must have the right to choose his walk of life. (PR, § 206.)

This of course sharply differentiates Hegel’s ‘estate’ from those of traditional society. These usually defined a station into which men were born and to which they had to cleave throughout life. But Hegel rejects this immobile society, along with anything approaching a caste system. For this is incompatible with the principle of individual freedom, which is central to the fully realized state. This is generally overlooked by those who want to class Hegel simply as a conservative.3

Civil society as a system of needs is naturally forced to develop further beyond the simple set of relations of production and exchange. Since it is the sphere in which men are related as persons, it has to protect and maintain men’s rights. Hence it is involved in the administration of justice. But beyond this, the operation of the economy for the good of its members is far from being entirely assured by automatic mechanisms, in spite of the good work of the invisible hand. Lots of things can go wrong; and in the name of the good of individuals public authority has to intervene.

Hegel thus takes us in the second and third sections of civil society beyond the level of economic relations to functions which are judicial and properly political. But we are not yet dealing with the state. The reason is that we are still dealing here with individual men, the subjects of needs, united together for their common interest. What we discover is that the exigency of this common interest takes us beyond relations of production and exchange; and requires as well the administration of justice and a certain amount of regulation of economic activity. But we are not yet at the stage where we are looking on the political community as the substance, that is as constituting itself the end. The goal of all the regulations spoken of in the third section of civil society is still the good of individuals.

Hegel sees the necessary regulation being done partly by public authority, partly by corporations which are representative of various groups and professions and which operate with a publically recognized status. But what is particularly interesting and worth pausing over for a moment is Hegel’s insights into the problems of civil society. It is not just that many accidents of economic life, natural disasters, overproduction, etc., can reduce men to poverty and that society thus has to operate some kind of welfare state. It is also that there is an inherent drive in civil society towards dissolution.

If civil society expands in an unimpeded way, it grows indefinitely in GNP and population. This increases greatly the wealth of some. But it also leads to an intensification of the division of labour, the increasing subdivision of jobs, and the growth of a proletariat which is tied to work of this sort. This proletariat is both materially impoverished, and spiritually as well by the narrowness and monotony of its work. But once men are reduced in this way materially and spiritually they lose their sense of self-respect and their identification with the whole community, they cease really to be integrated into it and they become a ‘rabble’ (Pöbel). The creating of this rabble goes along with the concentration of wealth in a few hands (PR, § 244).

This in turn sets off a crisis of over-production. The under-privileged can be maintained on welfare. But this contradicts the principle of the bourgeois economy whereby men should work for their living; or they can be provided with employment by the state; but this will increase the crisis of overproduction.

It hence becomes apparent that despite an excess of wealth civil society is not rich enough, i.e. its own resources are insufficient to check excessive poverty and the creation of a penurious rabble.(PR, §245)

The explanatory note to this section mentions the situation in England and Scodand.

The inner dialectic of civil society drives it beyond itself in an attempt to solve this problem by finding overseas markets and by colonization (PR, § §246-8).

The passage reminds us strikingly of the work of Hegel’s illustrious successor who was only three years old at the time. Nor is this just a superficial convergence. A study of some of Hegel’s writings of the early 1800s shows that he had thought deeply about the connection between the growing industrial society and increasing material and spiritual impoverishment.4 He had to a startling degree anticipated the young Marx’s theory of alienation. For he sees the system of division of labour and exchange as taking on a momentum of its own. It becomes an ‘alien power’ (fremde Macht) operating by its own laws (of supply and demand), and disposing of people’s lives as an ‘unconscious, blind fate’ (Bewußdoses, blindes Schicksal, System der Sittlichkeit, 80–1). This can enrich or ruin whole groups of people in a blind, unforeseeable way.

But further, it has its own dynamic. Wealth, abstracted from immediate possession of objects of use, tends to breed wealth (Realphilo, I, 232–3), and this in turn becomes power (Herrschaft, SdS 83). So that extremes of wealth, and endless refinement of consumer taste go along with the relegation of masses to poverty and their condemnation to ‘blunting, unhealthy, insecure and narrowing... work’ (abstumpfenden, ungesunden, und unsicheren und die Geschicklichkeit beschränkenden.. .Arbeit, Realphilo, II, 232). And this ramifying system constantly spreads itself through more and more branches of industry (Realphilo, II, 233). In the process it deprives masses of men of all human culture. It reduces them to ‘bestiality’ where they cannot appreciate higher things (die Bestialität der Verachtung alles Hoen, SdS, 84). And it turns them against the whole system in indignation and hatred (die höchste Zerrissenheit des Willens, innre Empörung und Haß, Realphilo, II, 233).

This extraordinary convergence5 between Hegel and Marx allows us to see the contrast. For this clear-sighted view of the inherent tendencies of the economic system founded on the division of labour and exchange did not alter Hegel’s conception of it as an essential dimension of modern society. Hegel goes on seeing the ‘invisible hand ‘as an instrument of the cunning of reason even while grasping its appalling inadequacy to produce a just society, or even save society from dissolution. The division of labour, the refinement of taste, the economy of individual enterprise all were essential to the development of modern individuality and the specialization and differentiation which were inseparable from it, as we saw above. For Hegel there can be no question of abolishing the bourgeois economy. Rather its inherent drive to dissolution must be contained through its sub-ordination to the demands of the more ultimate community which is the state. This higher allegiance and the rules which flow from it must keep men from giving way to those extremes of the drive for self-enrichment which pull society into the slip-stream of uncontrolled growth.

In Marx’s view, on the other hand, this solution was a chimaera. For the state itself was conditioned by the economy. Far from being able to control it, the state rather reflected its tensions and the relations of domination within it. The contradictions of civil society could neither be resolved, nor contained. It has to be abolished.

Of course, in respect of the possibility of controlling the bourgeois economy Marx was much more perspicacious than Hegel (he also had the advantage of coming later). But the difference between the two was not just one of empirical judgement. The Hegelian synthesis as an ontologically grounded order which was embodied in differentiated groups necessarily contained within it controlled tension between opposites. Marx’s perspective on the other hand, looks to the realization of man, not of Geist. The realization of man in freedom requires the universal and total participation which we saw as essential to a general will society. And this requires a homogeneous and united society, in which all differentiation is overcome. The quite different way of surmounting the strains in civil society, in one case by its sub-ordination, in the other by its abolition, are connected to the fundamental concepts of these respective thinkers.

For Hegel civil society is thus to be kept in balance by being incorporated in a deeper community. It cannot govern itself. Its members need allegiance to a higher community to turn them away from infinite self-enrichment as a goal and hence the self-destruction of civil society. Self-management through corporations can be seen as a stage on this road. It makes the individual member of a larger whole, and lifts him, as it were, toward the state. In the corporation he has the respect and dignity which he would otherwise seek, left as a simple individual, in endless self-enrichment (PR, § 253 E).

2
We come now to the state which is the full realization of the Idea of Sittlichkeit, that is a community in which the good is realized in common life. The family and civil society were only partial, non-self subsistent realizations. With the state, we have a full and self-subsistent one. It is the manifestation of substantial will. It is the community in which the fullness of rational will is manifest in public life. The fully realized state reconciles the fully developed individual subjectivity and the universal. It is concrete freedom.

Concrete freedom consists in this, that personal individuality and its particular interests not only achieve their complete development and gain explicit recognition for their right (as they do in the sphere of the family and civil society) but, for one thing, they also pass of their own accord into the interest of the universal, and, for another thing, they know and will the universal; they even recognize it as their own substantive mind; they take it as their end and aim and are active in its pursuit.(PR, § 260)

This is what is achieved in the modern state.

The state is to be seen as a realization of rational necessity, of the Idea. As such, its articulations are to be understood as self-articulations of the Idea. Hegel speaks of the state as an ‘organism’. But it is an organism which is thought of as producing its articulations according to a necessary plan. These articulations are fixed by the Concept (PR, § 269). They form the constitution of the state.

Hegel here has a note on the relations of Church and state. Religion contains the same truths as the state expresses in reality. True religion should thus support the state; it should cultivate the inner conviction that the state ought to be obeyed, supported, identified with. It is a deviation when religion either retreats into other-worldliness or turns around and sets itself up against the state. The state should afford help and protection to the Church, for religion is a form of spirit’s knowledge of itself. But it cannot accept a claim by the Church to be higher, for this would imply that the state was simply an external authority, as association for utility, like civil society, and not itself an embodiment of reason (PR, § 270 E).

Because the constitution of the state is rational, that is, the state is articulated like an organism into its different members, we cannot think of the division of powers in a spirit of checks and balances. This assumes that the different powers are already self-subsistent and have either to strive against each other or reach a compromise. But this is contrary to the very principle of the state as an organic unity, a unity which articulates itself, and in which a common life flows through all the members. If we have got as far as to engage in the game of checks and balances ‘the destruction of the state is forthwith a fait accompli’ (PR, § 272 E).

There is an important general point here which is central to Hegel’s philosophy of the state. The state as a community embodying reason has to be lived as an organic whole; it cannot be seen simply as an aggregation of its elements, be these groups or individuals. For in this case it could not be lived by its citizens as the locus of a larger life with which they identify. Hegel argues strenuously against the type of constitution or constitutional provision which is based on this atomistic or composite view of the state. This is the view of men in society as simply ‘a heap’, as against an articulated unity. If we start with men fractioned into individual atoms, no rational state or indeed common life will be possible.

The constitution into which the state articulates itself according to the concept has three members: the legislative power which determines the universal law; the executive which subsumes particular under the universal, and the power of subjective decision, the Crown. Hegel takes this latter up first.

We have already referred earlier to Hegel’s argument for the necessity of monarchy from the Concept. The state as a whole has to have a will, that is, it has to decide things. The process of decision is one that may, and should involve many people, functionaries and representatives. But these are all operating in inter-dependence with each other, and in their official, not personal capacities. In order for the moment of decision as a single will of the state to have its own expression, as it must in a mature constitution, it must come to a head in a single person. The state’s will then comes to actuality in the ‘I will’ of a concrete individual. For the state as subjectivity attains its truth only in a subject.

We may think that the monarch himself as so acting is also only acting in his official capacity. But the king is not an official like the others. For in him the office is not his in virtue of some mediation, choice by others, or certain qualifications he has achieved or whatever; but he acquires it in an immediate, ‘natural’ fashion, i.e., by birth. Hereditary monarchy provides us with an expression of the will of the state in an immediate individual, one who ‘is essentially characterized as this individual, in abstraction from all his other characteristics’ (PR, § 280). This is the real argument for hereditary monarch from the Concept. It is not justified simply by considerations of prudence, such that the throne in this way is above strife and faction, and so on.

In the ancient world, this ‘moment of the final, self-determining, decision of the will does not come on the scene explicitly in its own proper actuality as an organic moment immanent in the state’ (PR, § 279 E). Of course, the ancient democracies had leaders, and other ancient polities had kings. For practically speaking all social decision has to be inaugurated and completed by leaders. But what was absent was the idea of absolutely free decision. The power of the leaders was conditioned, they had to appeal beyond to fates, oracles, etc.

We recognize here Hegel’s point that in the Greek world, the limited individuality of the Gods left over them, in the place of the absolute final mastery over reality, an impersonal fate. The ancients had no vision in the heavens of a subjectivity which had the final word over all reality. Subjectivity was always limited, in the grip of fate. As with the Gods, so with the states; these limited individualities felt that they also had to remit their power of final decisions over particular matters to the scrutiny of fate, through oracles or augury.

But in modern times, Christianity provides us with a vision of absolute subjectivity and hence in the modern age men no longer lack ‘strength to look within their own being for the final word’ (loc. cit.). The fullness of this self-determining will can only achieve an adequate expression if the society’s decision culminates in a single consciousness.

This is one of those cases where the detail of Hegel’s argument leaves one with a sense of the arbitrary. Granted that a social decision has finally to be promulgated by some person, it is not clear why the realization of the modern idea requires that this be a hereditary monarch, and not a president, or governor-general, or whatever, We might agree that the sense that a society is really deciding for itself, as against following some externally-derived rule or guidance, requires a political life which turns around leaders, representative figures, whose decisions and pronouncements count as ours. But that this must be a hereditary monarch is hard to credit, in spite of Hegel’s persuasive deployment of the notions of immediacy and naturalness. One might think that the function of representative individual in this sense has been filled in our time just as well if not better by revered father figures like Eisenhower or Jomo Kenyatta, or ‘charismatic’ political leaders like J. F. Kennedy.

But it will not do to try to make Hegel sound less controversial here by claiming that the point really was more general, and concerned the need for a final pinnacle to the summit of the executive, whether this is filled by king, prime minister or president. Hegel knew this political necessity, that the buck stop somewhere. He recognized that it held in the ancient world too, in the passage I have just referred to. But he distinguished his point from this political necessity which he thought of as general and not specifically modern, and tied the modern sense of absolute decision specifically to the monarchy.

For in fact what is at stake here is not a practical necessity of politics at all, but the Hegelian idea of differentiation based on the Concept: the fulfilling of a necessary moment of the whole by a specialized person (or in some cases a group) who is nevertheless involved in a larger common life with the whole. He is an individual who can embody a moment of the whole because he is in this common life with the rest. Hence the modern monarchy must be a constitutional monarchy. For Hegel a unity is more developed the more its parts are articulated while still remaining in union with the whole. ‘The realized freedom of the Idea consists precisely in giving each of the moments of rationality its own self-conscious actuality here and now. Hence it is this freedom which makes the ultimate self-determining certitude – the culmination of the concept of the will – the function of a single consciousness’ (loc. cit.). The king is a truly representative individual, in the medieval sense, he bodies forth the moment of subjective free decision.

The prerogatives of the king are thus to be the apex of decision of the executive, to pardon criminals, and thirdly to embody the universal in his personal conscience – the universal which is also embodied objectively in the whole constitution.

The second part of the constitution is the executive power. This is charged with applying laws, which executing the law of the land, under the king. Hegel sees this as being entrusted to a class of civil servants whose lives are dedicated to this goal. In some cases, of course, the administration of the law will be in the hands of Corporations, but wherever this cannot be the solution, it must be in the hands of a civil service which is independent of the interests of society. This is an executive under the king which is made up of career, remunerated civil servants. The aim of making the civil service a career is to assure the maximum independence and dedication to the function itself, the maximum freedom from private interests. For the same reason and in order to secure the most effective service, the posts are filled on merit. Hegel accepts here la carrière ouverte aux talents (§§ 291–2 ‘Between an individual and his office there is no immediate natural link.’)

The civil service makes up the greater part of the middle estate (§ 297) which Hegel has called the universal estate in the earlier discussion on civil society (the rest is presumably made up partly of officials of corporations and other professionals?). Here we have another application of the Hegelian principle of the articulation of the essential moments of the synthesis. The dimension of total identification with the life of the state, with public affairs, is not to be lived by everyone in the same way, but is the mode of life of a special group. This shares however with the others in the larger life of the whole state, and is an organ in a greater organism.

Thus the function of total immersion in the public, which was that of all citizens among the ancients, devolves on the universal estate in Hegel’s mature polity. It is carried by a career civil service. This represents an interesting change from earlier variants of Hegel’s theory in the Jena period. In his writings of the early 1800s, e.g., the System der Sittlichkeit, and also in his lectures, published in our time under the title Jenenser Realphilosophie, Hegel presents us another system of estates. The basic principle of articulation is the same, but its working out is interestingly different. The second estate in this system too is that of business, and it has the same political and ethical culture as its opposite number in the system of 1821. But the estate which represents the more immediate, unreflecting, ethical life, whose life is close to nature and whose deep sentiment is trust and loyalty, is represented not by the agricultural class as such, but only by the peasants. The landed aristocracy forms rather the background of the first, which Hegel calls here the absolute estate, and which fills the role of total involvement in the universal, public life of the state.6

What lies behind this change in the first two decades (really 15 years, for the Jena lectures are from 1805–6) from aristocracy to bureaucracy? In part it may have been Hegel’s realization, under the impact of the Napoleonic state, of the importance and necessity of bureaucracy in the modern state, and the centrality of the principle of la carrière ouverte aux talents. In part, it may have been progressive disenchantment with the contemporary aristocracy. The landed privileged of Germany were generally dedicated, as soon as the Napoleonic hegemony was set aside, to restoring all the outworn and irrational privileges of the ancien régime.

This may also cast light on Hegel’s emphasis on monarchy. In his home state of Württemberg, the monarch tried to set up a liberal constitution after the Restoration, and was bitterly opposed by the interests which dominated the old estates. This was the occasion of one of those occasional political writings of Hegel which are our main evidence for his political evolution. His commentary on the Proceedings of the Estates Assembly which appeared in 1817 shows him siding strongly with the king against the reactionary attempt to return to the practices of a quarter century earlier. The merely positive must be set aside and the state reformed to reflect reason. The position taken here in commenting favourably on King Frederick’s constitution is in all essentials in agreement with the PR. But what is germane to our purpose here is that this and similar experiences may have helped convince Hegel not only that the aristocratic class was hardly a fit vehicle for the universal, but that the main instrument of reform without destructive revolution must be the monarchy. Just as early modern kings welded state power out of the warring chaos of their barons, so modern kings would help to embody the rational against the interests of the merely positive.

But it is unlikely that the model for this earlier version of the universal class was the aristocracy of Hegel’s time, for whom he never had much use. It is rather to be found in the ancient polis. The absolute estate of the early 1800s is like the citizen class of the ancient republic in that it is also the class of warriors. Those who give themselves totally to the public life are also those who go to war for the state. The fact that monarchy plays no part in these early variants of the Hegelian state strengthens the likeness to the ancient polity. We have a picture of an aristocratic republic, which has incorporated the principle of articulated specialization and through this has taken account of universal subjectivity. In SdS there is even a kind of ephorate, a class of priest-elders above the estates who are charged with maintaining the purity of the constitution. The shift from this to the system of PR would thus represent a further maturing and working out of Hegel’s belief that we cannot go home again, that much as he shared the immense nostalgic admiration and yearning of his generation for Greek Sittlichkeit, this was lost forever, and rightly so. The modern age could only remain true to its advances over the ancient through a representative monarchy served by a class of bureaucrats.

We come now to the legislative power. This must be made up of King, Ministers and Estates Assembly. In this latter we come to one of the cruces of the Hegelian system. The role of the Estates is to achieve the essential goal of the Hegelian state, to unite private individuals to public power, to make the former identify with and participate in this power.

The Estates have the function of bringing public affairs into existence not only an sich, but also für sich, i.e., of bringing into existence the moment of subjective formal freedom, the public consciousness as an empirical universal, of which the thoughts and opinions of the many are particulars.(PR, § 301)

Thus the Estates are meant to be the locus in which there is crystallized, out of the maze of private wills of civil society, a common will which is one with that of the state. It is the place in which civil society achieves political expression, reaches a common political will.

Thus, says Hegel, the justification for representative institutions is not at all where it is commonly put, that the people or their representatives know their own best interests, or are more disinterested and dedicated to the general good. Indeed, these propositions are certainly more false than true when we compare deputies to civil servants. The real point of the Estates is to incorporate civil society into the political, by involving it in the common will of the state. It is to bring private will and private judgement to a political will and consciousness focused on the whole and its ends, and in this way to unite those who live in the private sphere to the public life of the whole, so that they identify with this life and its acts.

Hence the specific function which the concept assigns to the Estates is to be sought in the fact that in them the subjective moment in universal freedom – the private judgement and private will of the sphere called ‘civil society’ in this book – comes into existence integrally related to the state.(PR, §301 E)

And to drive home the point that this is no consideration of prudence, but ontologically grounded, Hegel adds

This moment is a determination of the Idea once the Idea has developed to a totality, a moment arising as a result of inner necessity not to be confused with external necessities and experiences. The proof of this follows...from adopting a philosophical point of view.

But the will crystallized out of civil society must not be one in opposition to the government. This idea of representative institutions as mainly revendicative, as existing to fight for society’s rights against the state, which was quite widespread at the time, Hegel utterly rejects. A state in which this opposition arose would of course cease to be an organic unity, it would cease to have a common life and will with which all its members were identified. It would break apart into a sovereign governing will on one side, and on the other, over against it, into a fractioning of private revendications, ‘the particular interests of persons, societies, corporations’ (PR, § 302).

This image of the dissolution of the organic into independent parts plays an important part in Hegel’s discussion here, as a pendant to the image of the state as an organism. If the state is to realize Sittlichkeit, then it must constitute a common life in which all find their identity. But this cannot be if people mainly identify themselves by their private interests and see the state merely as the locus where these private interests have to come together to reach some kind of compromise essential to a functioning society. This is the kind of society which Hegel speaks of as a mere aggregate – a ‘crowd’ (Menge) or a ‘heap’ (Haufen) are terms Hegel uses (Cf. PR, § 302) – and this means a state in dissolution. In this situation, government can only survive as a despotism over individuals crushing private wills under the yoke of a law with which no-one identifies.

Hence it is that the function of the Estates cannot be seen as one of opposition to the government, rather they are meant to be a mediating element, the middle of a Hegelian syllogism. This function dominates the whole Hegelian discussion of the Estates.

It means that the Estates as representative institutions must be based on the organic articulation of the estates of society. Hegel holds it to be far from arbitrary that the German word ‘Stand ‘refers both to the social entity and its political expression (as does ‘estate’). For only through its substantial articulations can the people be linked to government. These already have done part of the work of linking the individual will to the universal through his membership in a greater whole. The further step to political expression must build on this. This same principle is what underlies the important role of the corporation in public administration.

Hegel thus turns his face against what has become an absolutely fundamental principle of the modern democratic state, universal direct suffrage. The idea of direct suffrage is that people vote as individuals, they are not represented in their capacity as members of some estate or group or other articulation of society. Hegel calls this an ‘atomistic and abstract point of view’ (PR, § 303 E), it partakes of the vision of the state as a mere mass, an aggregate of individuals. To take this is to abandon any hope of a substantive common life, or indeed any hope of a common will. For the people, once it identifies itself as a mere multitude is ‘a formless mass whose commotion and activity could therefore only be elementary, irrational, barbarous and frightful’ (eine formlose Masse, deren Bewugung und Tun eben damit nur elementarisch, vernunftlos, wild und fürchterlich wäre’, loc cit.). Even if we avoid upheaval and the dissolution of society, political life on this model becomes abstract, it is cut off from social life which is articulated whether we want to accept it or not. Politics thus becomes something in which men cannot recognize themselves (loc. cit.). Here we have a critique which will come back in a transposed form in Marx, where the alienation of citizen from bourgeois is one of the contradictions of capitalist society.

Thus the Estates are articulated into two houses, one of which represents the landed class, the other the bourgeois economy. These must be related differently to the universal because of their different forms of life. The landed class has a certain independence, at once of the Crown and of the vagaries of business fortune, in its landed property. It is ‘independent of favour, whether from the executive or the multitude’ (PR, § 306). And this peculiarly fits it for a role in public life. (Hegel here retains a vestige of his earlier view of the Jena time.) This class has a special vocation for public life, and thus is entitled to sit in the Estates through birth, and not election (PR, § 307). Its members present themselves in person, and not through representatives.

The upper house can itself perform a mediating function within the whole constitution of the Estates which is meant to mediate between society and the state. For they share something with the king, they too owe their position to the natural, to birth; but also they have needs and rights like the rest of society. They mediate between lower house and Crown.

By contrast the lower house is made up of representatives. But these are not to be elected at large; in keeping with the principle above, they are appointed by the various associations, communities, corporations which constitute civil society. In this way the individual is related to the universal not simply immediately, but through the specific moment of the articulated group to which he belongs. And Hegel makes his point again, that an atomistic state is without rational organization

To hold that every single person should share in deliberating and deciding on political matters of general concern on the ground that all individuals are members of the state, that its concerns are their concerns, and that it is their right that what is done should be done with their knowledge and volition, is tantamount to a proposal to put the democratic element without any rational form into the organism of the state, although it is only in virtue of the possession of such a form that the state is an organism at all.

(PR, §308 E)

Men must relate to the polity not as individuals, but through their membership in the articulated components of the society. It is pure abstraction to demand that all men relate to political power in the same way.7

From the same principle that the Estates exist to mediate state and society, Hegel draws the conclusion that the deputies should not be seen as delegates of their electors. For the Estates, too, must function as an organic whole, bent on the common good, and not as simply an assembly of individual deputies.

And this principle also underlies Hegel’s discussion of public opinion. Hegel holds that assembly debates should be publicized, and that the press and organs of opinion, within certain limits, should be free. But this is not because he believes in the central tradition of the Enlightenment, that public opinion, as formed through public discussion, is bound to be enlightened. On the contrary he sees it as a mixture of insight and particular prejudice. It is gold hidden in mud. It deserves as much to be respected as despised (PR, § 318), for essential truths are mixed up with raw confusions. By itself it is no criterion:

Thus to be independent of public opinion is the first formal condition of achieving anything great or rational whether in life or in science. Great achievement is assured, however, of subsequent recognition and grateful acceptance by public opinion, which in due course will make it one of its own prejudices.

Great acts need never bow to public opinion, they fashion its future form. The point of publicity is thus not to improve government, but as an essential part of the Estates’ mediating function, to help the process of crystallization of a public political will out of the private, and one which will find itself in the actions of the state. The public is educated by the debates and forms itself up to the political in the development of public opinion.

We have looked at the essential features of the inner constitution of the Hegelian state. We can see why it has acquired the reputation of being reactionary. It is not just the stress on monarchy. It is much more that the key foundation of the modern democratic state is thought to be elections by universal suffrage in which men vote as individuals. Any other form of government we are convinced, must both neglect the interests of those not directly enfranchised, and also provide no possibility for the mass of people to educate themselves in the rights and duties of political citizenship.

Hegel’s insistence that men not enter the political arena directly, but through their associations, corporations, etc., in a more organic fashion, strikes us as reminiscent of nothing so much as modern corporatism; which in Fascist countries has been used as a screen for dictatorial power, and which certainly did not provide a more meaningful participation. Even if corporatism were not controlled from on top, we tend to think, representation in legislative institutions which emanated from such associations would leave the people at the mercy of the élite groups which tends to control these. The ordinary people would live under a perpetual carve-up on behalf of the elites. In the eyes of many radicals our present society already resembles too closely this state of affairs. These radicals may even despair of Parliamentary government, but they turn rather to direct democracy, they are even farther from accepting some corporate solution.

Yet we must resist the natural tendency to understand and judge Hegel’s work simply out of the experience of our own time. I fully subscribe to the above criticism of corporatism, but I think Hegel’s work should be seen in another light.

I want to discuss this more fully in a minute. But first let us complete Hegel’s vision of the state by looking at its external relations. Here, of course, we have another source of the deep disapproval with which many moderns regard him. For in the next section (PR, § §321-9) he rejects the two basic goals of liberalism in the international sphere, which had already been ably defended by Kant, peace on a permanent basis between nations and world federation of states.

The reason for his rejecting the latter is already implicit in the foregoing. The state must be the locus of a higher life with which men identify. But men cannot stretch their identification so wide as to include everyone. The state must be the object of a powerful feeling of identification, of patriotism, which Hegel calls ‘sittliche Gesinnung’. But this cannot just be stretched at will to cover the whole human race. It must on the contrary repose on the ‘self-feeling’ (Selbstgefühl) of a people (PR, § 322 E). In other words, for Hegel, the project of an international political entity makes sense on the liberal assumption that the state is just an external instrument for the well-being of individuals, or to further moral goals (Moralität). From this point of view a world state is a superior form. Hence we find Kant arguing for it. But once one understands that the state is the locus of an organic public life which is the focus of our identity, then we see that it must remain an individual against others.

But its individuality against others, its negative relation to others in Hegelian terms, is linked to its ‘negative relation to itself’, that is, its power as an individual to weld all its parts into a whole and even sacrifice them for the good of the whole. This relationship comes to its reality in war, where effectively the state calls on people to maintain this substantial unity ‘at the risk and sacrifice of property and life’ (PR bee, § 209).

War is thus for Hegel in a pregnant sense the moment of truth. For it is the moment in which the true relation between the state and society comes to the fore. In peacetime the state has as one of its prime purposes to maintain and protect the property and other private interests of its members. And this is what leads to the mistaken view that political society simply exists to secure individual life and property (e.g., Locke). But in fact the state is the embodiment of the substantial, in fact it is the community in which men achieve their identity as bearers of rational will. It therefore is the end. And since its development is the goal of history, and civil society is one of its necessary component parts, we should think of the state as articulating itself into families, civil societies, spheres of right, etc., rather than these as constituting the state.

Now this real order of dignity and purpose only comes to the fore when the state is in danger and then shows its higher finality by commandeering property and calling its citizens to risk their lives and die for it.

But as a reflection of an essential moment of the state, according to Hegel’s ontological principles, war has necessarily to occur. Whatever reflects an essential moment of the concept must achieve external existence. Hence, though it might appear as though wars were purely contingent occurrences, and often in their detail they are, war itself is necessary. War cannot either be considered as accidental, nor as absolutely evil. Its necessary function is to embody the primacy of the universal; and thus without it peoples would stagnate into the swamp of private interests. Hegel here quotes himself from an earlier work:

The ethical health of peoples is preserved in their indifference to the stabilization of finite institutions; just as the blowing of the winds preserves the sea from the foulness which would be the result of a prolonged calm, so also the corruption in nations would be the product of a prolonged, let alone ‘perpetual’ peace.(PR, §324 E)8

Hegel also says in this section that death is the lot of the finite, of the particular anyway. This is assured by nature ordinarily; but

in the ethical substance, the state, nature is robbed of this power, and the necessity is exalted to the work of freedom, to be something ethical. The transience of the finite becomes a willed passing away, and the negativity lying at the roots of the finite becomes the substantive individuality proper to the ethical substance.(loc. cit.)

Modern war since the invention of gunpowder particularly meets this function of war to the highest degree, for we have here a struggle not of personalities or inspired by personal hate, but general conflict, for large purposes and with the impersonality of distance (made possible by firearms). This aspect of the state as well is embodied in a particular group; a standing army is thus a necessity of reason and not just of prudence (PR, § 326). Power over war and foreign affairs is in the hands of the Crown.

In the next section (PR, §§ 330–9), on international law, Hegel returns again to the point that any world state or league of nations is a chimaera. There are norms of international law, but these must remain pure Sollen; they cannot be made substantial, part of a self-maintaining common life.9

There follows (PR, § §341–50) an account of world-history, along lines we have already seen.

3
How can we sum up Hegel’s political purpose and vision? It must now be clear that the ordinary labels usually applied obscure much more than they clarify. Hegel has been called a conservative, and also a liberal,10 an apologist of the Restoration Prussian state, and a proto-totalitarian who would sacrifice the individual on the altar of a state divinity. The latter two descriptions are quite wide of the mark. But the first two are not just wrong. They are fundamentally misleading just because of the elements of truth they contain.

It is not wrong to call Hegel a liberal because of the central place that he gave to the principles of 1789. First, that the state must be founded on reason, not tradition. Hegel consistently attacks the real conservatives of his day, who wanted to maintain the old, ‘positive’ constitutions and authorities just because of their venerable, prescriptive foundation. He attacks those who defend the patriarchal power of monarchs, or their divine right to rule. Secondly, the modern state must be built around the free, rational individual. It must respect his freedom of conscience, freedom to select his profession, the security of his property and freedom of economic enterprise. It must allow for the dissemination of information and the formation of public opinion. It must be founded on the rule of law.

We perhaps need reminding today that these were not principles of the ‘Right ‘in the Restoration Europe after 1815 which was dominated by the Holy Alliance, however ‘conservative’ some of them may sound in Western democracies of the 1970s.

But Hegel decisively parts company from liberalism in that he believes that these principles are radically, indeed, disastrously inadequate as a foundation for the state. The label ‘liberal’ is uncommonly broad and loose, but there is a central tradition which has regarded individual liberty, equality (including the sweeping away of unearned privileges), and the responsibility of government to the governed as the three essential properties of a legitimate polity. Many thinkers we want to call liberal have wanted to mitigate the application of one or other of these principles: Locke did not think of the unpropertied masses as fit bearers of the franchise, and J. S. Mill thought that many peoples were not yet ready for representative government; but the thinkers we generally class as liberal did not recognize any other basic principle. (Unless, of course, we think of the rule of law as a principle independent of liberty and equality; in which case the trinity above should be a quaternity.)

The underlying belief of the liberal tradition is that these values were the sufficient basis for a viable society. That is, a society which embodied these should command the loyal co-operation of its members. It was believed either that men would be satisfied with the inherent justice of such an arrangement; or that enlightened men would see the utility of such a society and so play by its rules; or that men would identify with a society in which they were free and sovereign and consider it their own.

But whether for these reasons or others, the response of the liberal tradition to disaffection and break-up in society has always been to call for a further, more thoroughgoing application of the three principles; on the grounds that greater freedom, or the abolition of further inequalities, or fuller responsibility of government must be sufficient to overcome alienation or division.

In this sense, Hegel is most emphatically not in the liberal tradition. A society based on these three principles alone is one in which men are maximally free as individuals, with a homogeneous, undifferentiated way of life, and where government responds to the wills of these undifferentiated individuals. But this is just the kind of society which rather deserves to be called a ‘crowd’ (Menge) or a ‘heap’ (Haufen, PR §§ 302, 303). It is a ‘formless mass’ (eine formlose Masse, PR, § §279, 303).

Hegel’s rejection of this model of society goes deep into the bases of his philosophical position and into the underlying motives of his thought. The ideal of the expressive unity of man and society, beautifully embodied by the Greeks, is radically denied by this atomistic model. If the state is to respond to the wills of independent, equal individuals, then it is nothing but an instrument in their hands. It cannot be the locus of a larger life. There is no room for Sittlichkeit. We are back to the issue we examined in the last chapter. If merely human will is central, then the state is reduced to the status of a tool. It cannot be a greater life-process of which individuals are members.

But without this, not only can man not return to unity with Geist, there cannot be a viable state at all. Without its necessary articulation (Gegliederung) a people falls apart as a state (PR, § 279). Hegel seems to be borrowing Rousseau’s idea of a people ‘dissolving itself’ – only for the opposite reason: for Rousseau it is the promise to obey a part of the whole which thus destroys the political bond. One might say that for him the creation of articulation is the mortal political sin, whereas for Hegel it is its abolition which destroys the state. Nor is this destruction thought of as merely metaphorical. A state so atomized must lose the allegiance of its citizens. It is paralyzed in inaction for lack of consensus, or else the plaything of the arbitrary will of factions.

Hegel thus cannot accept the usual liberal perspective on the principles of 1789, liberty, equality and popular sovereignty (if I may amend the Revolutionary trinity for the purposes of this discussion); that they only need to be integrally applied, to sweep all else before them, in order to achieve a rational and viable society, the summit of political perfection. On the contrary, Hegel combats the total implementation of these principles, in the name of what looks like a quite unrelated, conservative principle: that society must have an articulated structure, involving different relationships of different ‘estates’ to political power, which is ultimately justified as a reflection of cosmic order. But pre-modern theories also justified the structure of society by reference to the order of things, e.g., that the king was to society as God to the world, or that society was a body of which the king was the head.

Thus in the name of what sounds like a pre-modern principle Hegel severely restricts the application of the Revolutionary trinity. Freedom of economic action is not to go beyond certain limits set by a watchful state; and it is moreover to be carried on within the confines of corporations. Equality cannot be allowed to become homogenization and break down the distinctions between estates in their rights, obligations and way of life. Above all, men cannot be allowed to participate in forming the common will just as individuals, expressing their personal choices through a vote. They must take part through their role in a given estate or the corporation to which they belong. A fortiori this common will cannot be simply the emanation of individual choices, but of deliberations which reflect the organic structure of the state.

No wonder, then, that Hegel has frequently been classed as a conservative. But this is just as unilluminating as to call him a liberal. For he in fact holds none of the pre-modern theories with their presumption of an order of things which is just given. Nor does he accept structures of subordination grounded in tradition or prescription. The only foundation he will accept is reason itself. The Hegelian tour de force is that he claims to deduce from reason and freedom a new articulation, so that this is held to be the true fulfilment of these central aspirations of 1789. The state of atomized, homogeneous individuals is not their logical fruition but a deviation, a monster produced by arrested development. For in fact the aspiration to reason and freedom comes to fulfilment by seeing the human subject as the vehicle of a larger Spirit. The proponents of homogenization, or limitless freedom, or universal suffrage democracy, have all failed to make this shift in the centre of gravity of their thought. They remain obsessed with the finite subject and his independence, and they are incapable of recovering a viable basis for the state. Thus Hegel does not see himself as arresting or limiting the realization of the principles of 1789 in the name of some extraneous principle of order. He sees the articulated state as their true, and indeed only viable fulfilment.

This original position is the ground for Hegel’s judgements on the states and politics of his day. Hegel’s widespread reputation as a conservative, even a reactionary, has been based on his supposed endorsement of Prussia as the fullest realization of the modern state. This view is based on lamentable historical ignorance. In fact the Hegelian state as portrayed in PR existed nowhere in totality, as I pointed out in the previous chapter. The new stage existed still only in general outline and was yet to be worked out. Contemporary Prussia (of 1821) evidently did not fill the bill. For instance there was no assembly of estates for the whole realm, but only for individual provinces; the debates in these were not public; trial by jury was not yet established; a rigid censorship prevented the formation of free public opinion; the Prussian monarchy was much more untrammelled than the constitutional monarchy portrayed in PR. No contemporary could have failed to notice discrepancies of this magnitude. Only later commentators who had forgotten or were uninterested in the history of the period could endorse this fable.

But once we have set aside the myth of Hegel as aposde of ‘Prussianism’, we have to understand the sense in which he saw Prussia as in the vanguard.

At least this was the case after the Restoration, when he overcame his admiration for Napoleon’s work, and once more began to believe (if he ever stopped believing) that the state should be the sovereign cadre of spiritual life; or at least began again to believe that such a state could be built in Germany (but not a pan-German state; this was not at all a goal of Hegel’s).

Now this seems grotesque to us because as believers in the liberal trinity we think of the good state as a polity based on representative institutions with universal suffrage. From this point of view, transferred back into the 1820s and early thirties, we give high marks among European states to France after 1830, to England particularly after 1832. Hegel died before 1832 (in 1831), but he read and wrote an article on the Reform Bill, and his criticisms seem beside the point and even churlish to a modern. It does not seem important to him that the Reform will broaden the franchise, but rather that it will end the abuse whereby a public role, that of deputy, should be in the gift of private persons almost as their property. But he has little confidence that this will lead to other such reforms for England seems to him as the principle of civil society run riot.

But this placing of Prussia ahead of England and France is very instructive. For these two Western nations represented two of the great disruptive forces which Hegel saw as endangering the unfolding of the modern state. The first was the kind of mob action inspired and controlled by revolutionary élites of which the Jacobins provided the paradigm example. The second was the force of private interest, inherent in civil society, which always threatened to overflow its limits and dissolve the bonds of the state. Both these were dangers implicit in the modern principle of free individuality, but corresponding to different philosophical stages. The first was in a sense Rousseau on the rampage, the second was utilitarianism run wild (Bentham gone berserk).11

France was peculiarly open to the first danger, largely because of her religious history. As we saw in the last chapter, the modern state develops partly out of the Protestant Reformation. This represents an important stage in the internalization of man’s relation to the universal, which is no longer mediated through an external hierarchy and gross, sensuous forms. Hence in Catholic countries there cannot be a stable constitution based on a deep identification of people with the state. The Church is too powerful and stands in the way. The Catholic Church will not accept the role of a purely spiritual power. It will not admit that the unity between particular and universal reflected in Christian theology is meant to achieve its real, external historical existence in the state. Hence in these countries there is always division; the state cannot gain universal allegiance, the ‘ethical conviction’ (sittliche Gesinnung) which is possible in Protestant countries.

Now this disability affects France, which is thus disqualified for leadership in the development of the modern state. Because of this lack of ‘ethical conviction’, and the strength of ideas inimical to Sittlichkeit, France was prey to violent, sweeping changes and instability. As a natural consequence to Catholic rejection of the liberal state, one finds an ultra-abstract notion of this state among its followers, founded ultimately on the principle that Hegel combats, that the state unites and expresses the wills of individuals. The disorders of 1830 did nothing to change Hegel’s judgement on France. And the enlarged electorate of the July regime naturally did not impress him as progress.

But what about England? Here we have a Protestant country. Yes, but one which has succumbed to the second danger. The principle of the private, of individual property, has run wild in it, has even taken over many public functions. The English confuse freedom with particular rights. There is no real dominance of the universal, but only a chaos of negotiating private rights. And what is worse, the matter seems irremediable. For the only force which could cure this would be a strong monarchy, like those late medieval kings which forced through the rights of the universal against their refractory barons. But the English have crucially weakened their monarchy; it is powerless before Parliament which is the cockpit of private interests. Hence they are beyond hope of remedy. This is the ground for Hegel’s pessimism which he expresses in his last occasional work, on the English Reform Bill.

However, one feels like asking, why does Hegel not see where the force actually was destined to come which brought (at least some of) these private interests to heel? I am speaking of the popular majority. In fact Hegel did foresee the danger of revolutionary action if the English did not sort out their problems quickly enough in an orderly way. And in general he sees this as a nemesis threatening a civil society out of control in the form of an alienated proletariat, the spectre which haunted Europe in 1848. And indeed, Revolution will be the fate of any society which will not do away in time with irrational and merely ‘positive’ privileges.

But for Hegel, Revolution was not a solution for the modern state; it was merely another form of disease. For the reasons outlined above, both in experience and theory, Hegel feared and distrusted popular power, change through mass force, either by Revolution or by popular pressure. Such struggle was incompatible with the achieving of unity around a substantial will. It could only be justified if society needed another revolution to complete the work of reason, and this Hegel did not believe.

Hence the vehicle by which the rational constitution could best be introduced and made real was a powerful modernizing monarchy. Admittedly the Prussian king left a lot to be desired in this respect. After undertaking to grant a constitution after the war, he welshed on this promise and did not like to be reminded of it by his subjects. The Crown Prince, the future Frederick William IV, was an outspoken reactionary. Nevertheless Hegel had hopes for the future based on the climate of the times. Germany had been shocked and swept into reform by the Napoleonic conquest. It consisted of societies founded on law in which the principles of rational Enlightenment had already gone some way and seemed bound to go farther. It had a Protestant political culture and hence could achieve a rational constitution unlike the benighted peoples of Latin Europe, and it was not too far gone in rot like England. It held to the monarchical principle and the monarchs retained some real power unlike England, and yet the societies were law societies. In a monarchy bound by law, but retaining the power of initiative, in a Protestant country in which philosophy had reached its peak, surely it was not too much to hope that some reforming King would move to embody the fullness of the rational state?12

But history, as we know, belied Hegel’s hopes not only about Germany but about the development of the modern world. In fact the liberal trinity of individual liberty, equality and popular sovereignty have gone on apace, entrenching and extending themselves. Where they have been supplemented, or checked more than temporarily, it has not been by a vision of order based either on tradition or on reason, but by other, modern ideologies. For instance, the family of ideologies of total mobilization, of which Marxist-Leninism provides the paradigm for our century, but which has now been imitated and caricatured in every conceivable way, is the major contemporary rival of liberalism. And it is the linear descendant of that aspiration to absolute freedom which Hegel portrayed in so penetrating a fashion. It is powered by its own version of the three principles of liberty, equality and popular sovereignty.

But the most important force to fill the gap left by the decline of traditional allegiances has been nationalism. Indeed, much of the power shown by ideologies of mobilization has come from their marriage with national aspirations. And nationalism has been a force in liberal society as well. It has often been said of Hegel that he failed to appreciate the importance of nationalism for the coming age. But this was really just a corollary of his belief that the drive toward individualism and homogenization would be contained by a new vision of order. For it is the continued, unchecked operation of this drive, sweeping all traditional authority and social differentiation before it, which has opened the void that nationalism has been called on to fill. And reciprocally, the religion of nationalism, adopted by an élite which has broken free from traditional forms, has been a powerful instrument of homogenization. How many modern societies could command sufficient loyalty and civic spirit to carry on without a strong dose of nationalism? A clear-cut answer is hard to give, but one suspects the number is small.

In other words, Hegel failed to identify the new age which was being forged in his time because he saw its driving forces, liberty, equality, popular sovereignty, as destined to be subsumed (aufgehoben) in a new rational order, grounded on ontological necessity. The shape of a world in which these forces would press ahead unchecked and independent of any order towards ever greater individual mobility and social homogeneity was something he never considered. It seemed a wildly unviable prospect.

But this does not mean that Hegel did not understand the nature of these (to him) disruptive forces. On the contrary, in a sense he understood them more deeply than his contemporaries. For he not only had a profound grasp of the two great clusters of ideas and images which have alternately shaped the drive towards liberty and equality, that is, utilitarianism and the aspiration to absolute freedom; he not only understood the inner dynamic of these as ideas.

He also saw the dynamic of modern ‘civil society’. He saw, that is, how the manufacturing economy based on division of labour and exchange tended to extend itself endlessly, and in the process to prize men loose from any group allegiance, to accelerate their individual mobility while at the same time intensifying their reciprocal dependence in a vast, impersonal system. In other words, the modern economy, left to itself, would be a powerful engine of individualism and homogenization. The bourgeois economy would indeed generate differences, and extreme ones, of wealth and poverty. But these would be without rationale, unlike the estates of traditional (or Hegelian) society, and it would be left to chance, and the shifting sands of fortune, who ended up in which category, and for how long.

Hegel thus sees the drive towards modern homogeneity not just as residing in certain ideas, but as inherent in certain institutions and common modes of life. Indeed, Hegel understood as few other social thinkers how ideas are interwoven in practices and institutions, how the first are essentially involved in the identification of the second, and how the second in turn express and hence also define their constitutive ideas. This is the set of connections implicit in the Hegelian notion of institutions as ‘objective spirit’, as we saw in Chapter XIV. The bourgeois economy can be seen as modern individualism, in its utilitarian variant, expressed in a mode of life and set of practices. Its excesses breed alienation, a mass without identification with their society, and hence ready for a revolution. This in turn must be powered by the aspiration to absolute freedom, which represents the moderns’ attempt to fill the void left by modern individualism, and recover a society expressive of themselves.

Hegel understood this whole dynamic well, uncannily well. He failed to predict it because he was confident it would be checked and subsumed in the rational order of the modern state founded on the Idea.

But because things did not turn out this way, intellectual history has been unavoidably unfair to Hegel. For his vision of order, which is neither traditional (based on ‘positive’ authority), nor what we recognize as ‘modern’ (founded on the liberal trinity, or nationalism, or an ideology of mobilization) has quite naturally been lost to view. It is then assimilated to one or another of the above categories with which people are readily familiar.

This is the origin of Hegel’s ‘Prussian’ reputation. Prussia went through a number of phases in the nineteenth century. Under the reactionary leadership of King Frederick William IV, it stood aside from the liberal nationalism of 1848. Then later, under Bismarck, it took the initiative in uniting Germany. This Hohenzollern Germany, of which the King of Prussia was Emperor, was a peculiar mixture of traditional allegiances and liberal practices, held together by the powerful fixative of nationalism.

As the actual content of Hegel’s vision was progressively lost to sight, with ideologies of traditionalism or modernization dominating the scene, what came to be remembered of him was (a) that he thought that Prussia was on the right track, and (b) that he believed that the state was somehow divine and deserving of the individual’s highest earthly allegiance. It was forgotten what track Hegel had thought Prussia to be on in the 1820s, and above all, what he meant by divinity and the state. So naturally both friends and enemies attributed to him the then current grounds for giving one’s highest earthly allegiance to the Prussian German state, which were a mixed appeal to traditional authority and modern chauvinistic nationalism. That such an appalling salad of the merely positive and the sub-rational should be attributed to Hegel, the philosopher of a rational cosmic order, is one of the great ironies of modern intellectual history. Such are the penalties of too great originality.13

But does not the very oblivion into which his main ideas fell show the irrelevancy of Hegel’s political thought? One might be tempted to think so since the forces of individualism and homogenization have pressed on apace. All social differentiation has come under attack, not only those forms which are based on birth or social position, but even the biologically based one, that between the sexes. The modern notion of equality will suffer no differences in the field of opportunity which individuals have before them. Before they choose, individuals must be interchangeable; or, alternatively put, any differences must be chosen. This emphasis on choice in the contemporary principle of equality reflect its marriage with a radical notion of freedom, as self-creation.14

Together these two have swept aside all the articulations of traditional society, and have set themselves to combat the new ones which have arisen. As we look over the history of the last two centuries, there seems to be an unmistakable trend, in which stage by stage differences are set aside and neutralized, culminating in a society in which everyone (at least in theory) will stand equal with all others before a potentially limitless field of possibilities. In the name of this equality in freedom, we are now undergoing a profound revolution in the status of women, and even to some extent in that of minors (cf. for instance, the lowering of the voting age to 18, now almost general throughout the Western world).

Nor is this movement confined to liberal society. Contemporary totalitarian societies may restrict individual freedom, but they hold just as strongly to the principle of liberty as self-creation. And they have been even more determined agents of individual mobility, breaking individuals loose from their identification with primary groups and making them relate exclusively to the larger society. They too aim to create a society in which all men are equally master of their fate, interchangeable before a free choice in an expanding field of potentialities, even though they see this choice as necessarily a common, collective act, rather than a set of individual options.

What does Hegel have to say in the face of this development which he not only did not foresee, but arguably thought to be impossible? The answer is, in fact, a great deal. For although he did not foresee it, he understood a lot about its dynamic, as I argued above.

In fact the society of interchangeable free individuals is Hegel’s ‘heap’. He did not think such a society was viable, that is, it could not command the loyalty, the minimum discipline and acceptance of its ground rules, it could not generate the agreement on fundamentals necessary to carry on. In this he was not entirely wrong. For in fact the loyal co-operation which modern societies have been able to command of their members has not been mainly a function of the liberty, equality and popular rule they have incorporated. It has been an underlying belief of the liberal tradition that it was enough to satisfy these principles in order to gain men’s allegiance. But in fact, where they are not partly ‘coasting’ on traditional allegiances, liberal, as all other, modern societies have relied on other forces to keep them together.

The most important of these is, of course, nationalism. Secondly, the ideologies of mobilization have played an important role in some societies, focussing men’s attention and loyalties through the unprecedented future, the building of which is the justification of all present structures (especially that ubiquitous institution, the party).

But thirdly, liberal societies have had their own ‘mythology’, in the sense of a conception of human life and purposes which is expressed in and legitimizes its structures and practices. Contrary to a widespread liberal myth, it has not relied on the ‘goods’ it could deliver, be they liberty, equality or prosperity, to hold its members loyalty. The belief that this was coming to be so is what underlay the notion of the ‘end of ideology’ which was fashionable in the late ’fifties.

But in fact what looked like an end of ideology was only a short period of unchallenged reign of a central ideology of liberalism. Once it came again under attack, its lineaments were once more in evidence. An important support of the liberal consensus was the view of man as primarily a producer, that is, engaged in moulding the raw material of nature and environment to suit his needs. The liberal (as against Marxist) variant of this sees man as first of all an individual productive agent. He has to enter into co-operation with others in the division of labour, but this co-operation is thought to be constantly subject to re-negotiation. The society of producers was thought to be free and responsive to its members because its relations were perpetually being negotiated. It was deemed creative and productive because of the scope for individual initiative.

Some were ready to adopt a picture resembling this as a neutral description of society, which gave indeed, the basis for the impending atrophy of ideology. But it in fact is as ‘ideological’ as any other, not for the unimportant reason that it fails to take account of some important facts: inequalities, imperfections, exploitations, but really because to see social relations in this way, and hence to try to make them over on this model, presupposes a certain view of man and the ends of life which is as contestable as any other. For instance it supposes that man’s primary relation to the world is as a producer, that the main importance of nature for him is as raw material, that men primarily define their purposes as individuals, prior to and relatively independently of the matrix of negotiation, that the future, as project, should always be more significant for them than the past.

That the liberal consensus depended, in some countries at least, on a complex of views of this kind became evident when an important part of the rising generation ceased to believe in them. The coming of a generation which is losing this allegiance to the goal of conquering nature and affirming man through work and production, has precipitated a crisis. We can now see how powerless and ineffective mere delivery of the goods is to keep a society from inner division, deadlock and possible breakdown.

This experience reveals that liberal society, like any other, cannot hold together simply by the satisfaction of its members’ needs and interests. It also requires a common, or at least widespread set of beliefs which link its structure and practices with what its members see as of ultimate significance. The liberal vision of a society of producers is a far cry from the traditional conceptions of a cosmic order which human society reflected. But it is similar to them in this respect, that it interprets society’s institutions and practices in the light of the important goals of human life, and this interpretation both helps define and justify these institutions. The modern view is as much, or as little, an ‘ideology’ as the traditional ones.

But in this respect a functioning liberal society was not entirely a ‘heap’ in Hegel’s sense. For its members were drawn together by a set of common meanings, expressed in their common institutions. A liberal society which is a going concern has a Sittlichkeit of its own, although paradoxically this is grounded on a vision of things which denies the need for Sittlichkeit and portrays the ideal society as created and sustained by the will of its members. Liberal societies, in other words, are lucky when they do not live up, in this respect, to their own specifications.

If these common meanings fail, then the foundations of liberal society are in danger. And this indeed, seems a distinct possibility today. The problem of recovering Sittlichkeit, of reforming a set of institutions and practices with which men can identify, is with us in an acute way in the apathy and alienation of modern society. For instance the central institutions of representative government are challenged by a growing sense that the individual’s vote has no significance.

But then it should not surprise us to find this phenomenon of electoral indifference referred to in PR.15 For in fact the problem of alienation and the recovery of Sittlichkeit is a central one in Hegel’s theory and any age in which it is on the agenda is one to which Hegel’s thought is bound to be relevant. Not that Hegel’s particular solutions are of any interest today. But rather that his grasp of the relations of man to society – of identity and alienation, of differentiation and partial communities16 – and their evolution through history, gives us an important part of the language we sorely need to come to grips with this problem in our time.

That Hegel did not foresee the development of modern society is of no moment.17 What matters is that he had insight into one of its perennial, recurring problems, one which the protagonists of the trinity of 1789, liberty, equality, popular sovereignty, whether in their liberal or revolutionary variants, have largely tended to deny. For they have seen the concern about Sittlichkeit, the identification of men with their society as a larger life of which they are a part, as essentially an affair for conservatives or even reactionaries. The full establishment of a society of free and equal citizens was to solve of itself all problems of alienation and division. But now that one of the bases common to both liberalism and Marxism, the apotheosis of man as producer, is beginning to falter under the impact of ecological disaster and the false priorities of uncontrolled technological growth, we are being forced to reassess the foundations of our civilization and re-interpret our history. We can now see that the free and equal society, far from being the antidote to alienation, rather presupposes some deeply held common conceptions about the ends of life, and our relation to nature and history.

This puts us in a dilemma, not unlike that of Hegel and the Romantic age. We need to combine the seemingly incombinable. Once more, as with the Romantics, restoring a society with which we can identify must go along with a new stance towards nature. But we have to combine this recovered common sense of a relation to nature which is not purely exploitative with the free, equal individual of modern society. We need at once freedom and a post-industrial Sittlichkeit. This dilemma may be as insoluble as its Romantic predecessor. But this should not stop us trying. And any serious attempt must incorporate the language and insights of those which have gone before. Among these Hegel’s is a giant.

 

 

1 This scope was not, of course, entirely original. Standard treatises on law or right had to discuss private right and law relating to the family, marriage, inheritance, etc. And Kant in his treatise dealing with law, Metaphysik der Sitten, had also dealt with morality or a theory of duties (Pflichtenlehre) as well. What is new is the distinction of civil society and the state, and of course, the whole ‘architectonic’ of Hegel’s system in which these different parts are deduced from the Idea.

2 We can see the important differences from Marx. Although Hegel understood the importance of the division of labour, and was astonishingly prescient about the consequences of its extension in the industrial system, as we shall see, he did not see this necessary interdependence as an integral, conscious expression of ethical substance. The domain of interchange with nature, or civil society, remains that of individual action and goals. The substantial element, which brings men to unity here, is quite unconscious. It is the operation of an ‘invisible hand’.

3 But by the same token one cannot but doubt the viability of this system. Is it possible to sustain estates with really different modes of life in a society where there is real mobility, and where men are free to choose their profession? Does not for instance the unreflecting loyalty of the agricultural class presuppose a way of life into which one is born? So that entry could only be free into the other two estates. Generalized mobility is a powerful solvent. It would end up destroying estates altogether. Which is, indeed, what has happened. Although, of course, we benefit from hindsight in second-guessing Hegel on this.

4 The works concerned are the System der Sittlichkeit of 1801–2 (published in G. Lasson (Ed.) Schriften zur Politik und Rechtophilosophie, Leipzig 1923), and two earlier attempts at a system, also of the Jena period, which have been called Jenaer Realphilosophie I and II (published by J. Hoff meister, respectively Leipzig 1932 and Hamburg 1967). These works were unpublished in Hegel’s lifetime, and were only given serious attention fairly recently. Cf. the interesting discussion in Avineri, op. cit. 87–98.

5 It really is a matter of convergence, not of borrowing, since Marx never saw these early manuscripts. He only had available the condensed discussion in PR.

6 In the Jena lectures Hegel calls this ‘the estate of universality’ or ‘the public estate’.

7 Cf. also the discussion of the ‘sovereignty of the people’ in § 279 E.

8 Quoting the wissenschaftlichen Behandlungsarten; ‘perpetual peace’ is a dig at Kant.

9 This reference to Sollen here is one of the considerations on which E. Weil bases his view that Hegel looked forward to a higher stage of history, one where a world state would be possible. Cf. Hegel et L’Etat, Paris 1950, pp. 75–9. But this is not very plausible, partly for the reasons mentioned above but also because of the point in § 322, viz., that as a locus of identification, the state cannot be superseded by some larger union.

10 E.g., by Z. Pelczynski, who places Hegel on the liberal ‘right’, Cf. Hegel s Political Philosophy, Ed. W. Kaufmann, New York 1970, p. 85.

11 Of course, these dangers were not entirely separate. Civil sc ety out of control can breed mob violence and revolution by creating an impoverished proletariat.

12 Perhaps understandably, this question seems to have been answered differently by Hegel the political philosopher and by Hegel the interested and committed observer of the contemporary political scene. Not that there was any difference in his conception of the vocation of the modern state, or of the obstacles and dangers in the way of its realization. But there does seem to be a difference in his confidence as to the outcome. The serene tone, certain of the triumph of reason, of the philosophical works contrasts with the realistic pessimism of the English Reform Bill and the anguish, even despair, of some private communications. As a concerned observer Hegel does not seem to have been as sure as his philosophical position might warrant that the various forms of irrationality – blind traditionalism, Romantic rejection of reality, revolutionary fanaticism – and the drives inherent in civil society to dissolution would not thwart the self-realization of reason and bar the way to the fulfilment of the rational state.

13 The process of saddling Hegel with ‘Prussianism’ began even before the birth of Bismarckian Germany. Rudolf Haym’s influential biography, Hegel und seine Zeit (1857), is probably its point of origin. But Haym identified Hegel with the Prussia of 1848, whose ruler was out of sympathy with everything he stood for.

14 Hence contemporary demands for equality are made in the language of freedom, e.g., ‘women’s liberation’.

15 Hegel remarks (§311) that this is especially evident in large states ‘since the casting of a single vote is of no significance where there is a multitude of electors’.

16 Cf. the discussion of the previous chapter.

17 Hegel’s work, of course, contains almost no forecasts, for prediction is an activity closed to philosophy. I am talking, however, about his identification of the emerging traits of the modern period, in which he was importantly wrong in the way described above.

 
    