## CHAPTER XV
## Reason and History
1
The fulfilment of Spirit therefore requires the growth of a community which will fully express and embody reason. And since spirit posits the world of space and time in order to realize itself, this fulfilment and hence also the community of reason can be considered the goal of history. This is how Hegel speaks of it in Reason in History:

The goal is that it come to be known that [Spirit] presses forward only to know itself as it is an und für sich,that it brings itself in its truth to appearance before itself – the goal is that it bring a spiritual world to existence which is adequate to its own [sc. the world’s] concept, that it realize and perfect its truth, that religion and the state be so produced by it that it becomes adequate to its concept...(VG, 61)

In this passage, both sides of the goal of spirit in history are expressed: spirit is trying to come to an understanding, a knowledge of self. But in order to do this it must bring into existence a reality, a spiritual community which must also be a real community (the ‘geistige Welt’ must be embodied in a ‘Staat’) which is adequate to its concept. Or again:

the goal is this, that Spirit come to consciousness of itself or make the world congruent to itself [die Welt sich gemäß mache] – for these come to the same thing... (VG, 74)

Thus history is to be understood teleologically as directed in order to realize Geist. What happens in history has sense, justification, indeed, the highest justification. It is good, the plan of God.

The true good, the universal divine reason, is also the power to bring itself about. This good, this reason in its most concrete representation is God...The insight of philosophy is that no force prevails over the power of the good, of God, which would prevent it achieving its end [sich geltend zu machen]...that world history exhibits nothing other than the plan of providence. God rules the world.(VG, 77)

History is according to providence, and the true philosophy of history as Hegel says is a theodicy.

History thus reaches its culmination in a community which is in conformity with reason; or we could also say, one which embodies freedom, for ‘the final purpose of the world is Spirit’s consciousness of his freedom and hence the first full realization of this freedom’. (VG, 63)

This freedom is not, of course, individual, negative freedom, the freedom to do what I like. It is the freedom that man has in following his own essence, reason. On the other hand,

the arbitrary choice [das Belieben] of the individual is precisely not freedom. Freedom which is limited is caprice [Willkür] which relates to the particular element of needs.

(VG, 111)

But to follow reason is to participate in the larger life of the state, for ‘In the state alone has man rational existence’ (loc. cit.). But the fully rational state is not the first community with which men identify as their ‘substance’. On the contrary, all important historical developments take place in such communities. Those men who live outside a state, in patriarchal tribal societies, for instance, are totally on the margins of history, either before it really starts or at its fringes. What comes at the end of history is not community as such, but rather one which from the first time is fully adequate to the concept, to freedom and reason.

Hence the march of history can be seen as the succession of such communities,1 the earlier ones being very imperfect expressions of what the later ones will embody more and more adequately. Hegel calls these concrete historical communities or peoples which are (more or less adequate) embodiments of Spirit, Volksgeister. They are the subjects of history. ‘The Spirit we have to do with here is the Volksgeist’ (VG, 59).2

Thus the Idea is realized in history, but through stages, and these stages are historical civilizations, Volksgeister.

World history is the presentation of the divine, absolute process of Spirit in its highest forms, of this progress through stages whereby he attains to his truth and self-consciousness about himself. The forms of these stages are the world-historical Volksgeister, the character of their ethical life, their constitution, their art, religion, science. To bring each of these stages to realization, this is the infinite drive [Trieb] of the world spirit, his irresistible thrust [Drang]; for this articulation and its realization is his concept.

(VG, 75)

The last sentence points to the fact that this set of stages is itself necessary, according to the Concept. It is necessary to its self-realization that spirit move from the greatest outwardness to full self-consciousness. But in the same way the stages on the road are set by necessity; each must work itself out. The motor force of movement is contradiction, that between the external reality and what it is meant to realize. The contradiction eventually brings any given form to dissolution. But the particular nature of the contradiction in this form determines the outcome, and hence from the collapse of the first form another specific one arises. Having resolved the contradiction of its predecessor, it falls victim to its own, and so on through the whole of history.

In this way history shows a dialectical movement, of the kind we described above in Chapter IV. But since the beginning point and the goal are set by the Idea, hence by necessity, so are all the intermediate stages necessary. For granted the starting point and the goal, the particular nature of the contradiction in the first form necessarily follows; and from its resolution arises the second form; from which and the goal the nature of the second contradiction must follow, and so on. History should thus follow a necessary dialectical plan.

The plan of history is that of the Idea, the philosophical understanding of which is presupposed by the philosophy of history.3 Hence the dialectic of history is to be understood as reflecting the conceptually necessary stages in the self-unfolding of the Idea.

But as will surprise no-one there is in fact a looseness of fit between history and logic. The conceptual relations in their general form permit of too many combinations to form a very rigorous a priori framework; and the historical events permit of too many interpretations in such high level concepts as ‘universal’, ‘particular’, ‘individual’ not to allow a great deal of play. One feels that the system would allow of accommodation to very wide changes in the course of history if we were suddenly to discover that our knowledge of the past had been mistaken.

In spite of this, however, there is a very strong and even potentially convincing unity to the general plan of things. The higher one soars over the detail, the more persuasive the philosophy of history seems. Even though there are very often fascinating insights in Hegel’s detail, it is the fit of the detail with the whole which raises doubts.

Stages of history, as the last quote above says, are represented by Volksgeister. Each stage is embodied in a certain people which labours to bring forth the idea of that particular stage. This is the common purpose of the people; they remain entirely captured by this common task, entirely identified with it, until it is achieved. Then things fall apart. Its members cease to give themselves totally, they turn to reflection, to an identity as individuals outside the public goal. They fall into ‘political nullity’ (VG, 68).

Hegel talks in this passage as though the transition from one stage to the next came about through the fruition and natural death of each world-historical people, rather than through an inner contradiction. But this is not really an incompatible view. Having developed its particular form to the utmost a given Volksgeist has also brought its inadequacy to a head. There being no further development of the Idea, only the inadequacy now stands out. Hence it is inevitable that men desert this state and dream of something else – desert it in their fundamental allegiance, that is, for they may go on living happily in it for some time. Somewhere else, however, a new force arises which bears the next stage.

But what men are doing in history, they do not fully grasp. Why they desert one standard and go to another is not clear to them. Or rather, they may have some clear idea, but this is not the deepest truth; since of necessity men in earlier stages of history cannot understand the plan of Geist as the philosopher now can (Hegel now can). This is where Hegel introduces his famous idea of the cunning of reason. Reason is represented in this image as ‘using’ the passions of men to fulfill her own purposes. Particular men and their purposes fall in the battle, but the universal purpose carries on safe above it.

It is not the universal idea which places itself in opposition and struggle, or puts itself in danger; it holds itself safe from attack and uninjured in the background and sends the particular of passion into the struggle to be worn down. We can call it the cunning of reason that the Idea makes passions work for it, in such a way that that whereby it posits itself in existence loses thereby and suffers injury.(VG, 105)4

But this picturesque image is not meant to be taken au pied de la lettre, as though a super-individual subject was deploying tools to its own ends. Rather we have to take into account that even men at the earliest stages of history are the vehicles of Geist. They have some sense, however cloudy, however fantastically expressed, of the demands of spirit. Hence it is not just a question of men’s individual ambition being used for a foreign purpose. Rather it is that those men whose individual ambition coincides with the interests of Spirit are filled with a sense of mission. They instinctively sense the importance of what they are doing, and so do the men around them, who flock to their banner; even though both the great man and his followers would be incapable of articulating the significance of what they are doing or of articulating it correctly. Hegel uses the word ‘instinct’ for this unconscious recognition of significance.

Thus in the passage quoted above about the cunning of Reason, Hegel cites the case of Caesar who in fact falls under the assassins’ knives as soon as he has done the work of spirit in bringing the Republic to an end. This is an example of Reason using expendable instruments. But in an earlier passage (VG, 89–90), he says in connection with Caesar that the correspondence of his own goal with that of the World-Spirit (Weltgeist) was what gave him strength:

his work was an instinct which brought to fruition what the time called for an und für sich.

And Hegel goes on:

These are the great men in history, whose own particular purposes comprehend the substantial content which is the will of the world spirit. This content is the true source of their power; it is in the universal unconscious instinct of men. They are inwardly driven to it, and have no further support against him who has taken up the fulfilment of this goal as his interest, so that they could resist him. Rather the peoples assemble under his banner; he shows them what their own inner bent [immanenter Trieb] is and carries it out.

Thus the work of the Weltgeist is felt as an ‘immanenter Trieb’ among men, one that is merely ‘instinctual’, that is, not understood; and this is why the work of reason gets done among the clash of individual ambitions in history.

Thus the greatness of world-historical individuals does not just lie in their being instruments of the World-Spirit. They are also those who first sense and give articulation to what must be the next stage. Once they raise this banner men follow. In a time when one form is played out, when Spirit has deserted the reigning form, it is the world-historical individual who shows the way to what all men in their depths aspire to. ‘It is the world-historical individuals who first told men what they wanted’ (VG, 99).

Once they do articulate this new form, it has an irrestible force, even for those who are inclined by their own interest or judgment against it, because deep down they cannot help identifying with it.

For the spirit which has stepped on to the next stage is the soul of all individuals, but an unconscious inner sense which great men first bring to consciousness for them. It is nevertheless what they really want, and it thus exercises a force on them which they surrender to even against their own conscious will; thus they follow these leaders of souls, for they feel the irresistable force of their own inner spirit which confronts them.

(loc. cit.)

A category like the ‘cunning of Reason’, far from being another incomprehensible, ‘mystical’ Hegelian idea, is indispensable for any theory of history which wants to give a role to unconscious motivation.5

2
Let us now look at the main themes of the philosophy of history. The principal drama of the sweep of history is the one which builds towards the major crux of Hegel’s philosophy of politics; how to reconcile the freedom of the individual who knows himself as universal rationality with a restored Sittlichkeit. The main drama of history is then opened by the breakdown of the perfect unity of Sittlichkeit in the Greek world, the birth of the individual with universal consciousness. It then follows the slow development through the succeeding centuries both of the individual (his Bildung) and of the institutions embodying Sittlichkeit, so that the two can eventually rendez-vous in the rational state.

The version of the history in compressed form which we have in Chapter VI of the PhG starts with the Greek world. But the major version contained in the lectures on the philosophy of history starts earlier, takes us through Chinese, Indian, Persian, Phoenician, Egyptian civilizations in the run up to Greek. It also deals with the Jews. There are also differences in the way Hegel cuts into even the areas common to the two versions; as there are between different cycles of the lectures. This reinforces what was said above about the detail of Hegel’s philosophy of history.

My aim here will be simply to give the general line of the dialectic of history, as a background to the main political problem mentioned above. In dealing with the pre-Greek civilizations, Hegel discusses their religious consciousness, and there are many elements here which reappear in the philosophy of religion. Their political structures and public life are closely bound up with this religious consciousness. As ever with Hegel the different aspects of a people’s life are bound together in its Geist. But the religious consciousness for these early peoples offers the most striking expression of the stage they were at, of the way in which they tried to realize the ontological reality, Geist, and its relation to the world and subject.

Spirit is struggling to achieve an understanding of itself as spirit, that is, as free subjectivity, and to see this as the absolute. But with the pre-Greek peoples – except for the Jews – the absolute is still less than subject; it is still bound up with external, hence impersonal reality, nature, or the total abstraction of the void (one aspect of Indian religion). The Persians achieve a high form of this in that they see the absolute symbolized in light, which is the most spiritual among natural forms, but they are still not yet at the breakthrough point.

This comes in one form with the Jews. Here we suddenly come to the realization that God is pure subject, spirit. But this realization can only be won at that stage by a radical separation of God as spirit from all contamination with natural, finite reality. The Jewish spirit, thinks Hegel, is therefore one of separation, radical transcendence. Abraham starts off by leaving his family and home in Ur of the Chaldees to become a wanderer. The Jewish people wage a constant fight against idolatry, which amounts to a mixing of the divine again with the finite. But this solution can only be a stage on the way, for it is radically imperfect. God is spirit, but at the cost of being beyond the world, and above all beyond, above and over finite subjectivity, that of man. Man is not reconciled with God, does not see himself as at one with the absolute, as its vehicle, but rather the absolute is over against him, he is its slave, totally submitted to it. Similarly, the natural world is totally emptied of the divine. It is ‘entgöttert’, as Hegel puts it; Jewish consciousness sees only a world of finite things, which are to be used by man, not the embodiment of Deity. The world is totally under spirit, at our disposal, even as we are totally under God. Hegel also speaks of this vision of God as of ‘pure thought’, which in Hegelian terms is closely linked with being pure subject. In this formulation he stresses again that the Jewish concept of the absolute is of something universal, totally without particularization.

The Greek solution is in a sense the opposite of the Jewish one. The Greeks, too, win through to a consciousness of God as subject. But it is not a subjectivity which is frighteningly beyond nature, which negates natural expression in the purity of thought. Rather the Greek gods are perfectly harmonized with their natural expression. But instead of this being something infra-personal, as with the earlier natural religions, the paradigm expression of these Gods is in the form of realized subjectivity, that is, in human form.

But the Greek God, unlike the Jewish, is parochial. And this same parochial nature is what we shall see reflected in the Greek polis, and will be the cause of its downfall. A similar advantage is won at similar cost. On one hand, the Greek concept of the divine is the charter of Greek freedom. It is the sense that the divine is not totally other, that finite subjectivity has its place in it. And this is the sense of freedom, that man is not the slave of the absolute, of something which is utterly foreign to his will. Hence the Greek polity will be the first home of freedom.

It was this which enabled the Greeks to build an embodiment of Sittlichkeit for which Hegel’s day pined, one in which men were fully at home, in which their whole identity was bound up with the living public reality of their polis. The vision of God in human form was the foundation for a public life woven around this divinity, the God of the city, in which the citizens could fully recognize themselves. This public life was a reality which was fully theirs. Their activity kept it going, and yet it also represented what was of ultimate significance for them, an expression of the divine. Hence their realized public life was their ‘substance’, the basis of their identity. Their ethic was one of Sittlichkeit, where what ought to be also was.

But this was a limited freedom. Only those who were citizens, who were thus members of a certain polis and the servers of its God, were so reflected in public reality. Slaves, and in general outsiders, were not. Each state had its own God, own laws, with which its members were fully reconciled, but these were different from state to state. The reassuring form of the divine was reassuring only for some. It reflected only part of humanity. Hence the Greeks did not have the intuition that man as such is free. Freedom was the appanage of citizens; slaves and barbarians were outside its ban.6

Correspondingly, the identification with the city on the part of its citizens was not based on universal reflection, but was one of immediate unreflecting adherence. The laws must be obeyed because they are those of our city, sans plus.

In this world, democracy (direct democracy) is the most natural form of government. For all men are totally identified with the whole. They only want to live and die for it; they can thus be entrusted with running it. But it is a parochial democracy, it excludes slaves and metics; for the identification is parochial.

Hegel makes clear why in his view ancient democracy is inappropriate as a model for the modern world. Ancient, direct democracy was possible in part because societies were so small; all could really take part and be really present when decisions were taken. But this is not all. One of the essential conditions of Greek democracy was precisely its exclusiveness. All the menial economic tasks were taken over by non-citizens. This not only meant that citizens had in general more leisure than otherwise would be possible to attend the ecclesia and see to affairs of state. It also meant a homogeneity of the population which cannot be attained in a modern polity where all functions are fulfilled by citizens. But heterogeneity makes essential an articulation of the modern state which in Hegel’s view excludes democracy.

But there is a third reason why ancient democracy is not an appropriate model for our time. The Greek state could work because men were immediately identified with it. Now while we hope to restore the integrity of Sittlichkeit, we can never restore this immediate, unreflecting unity. Modern man will also remain a universal individual. And this individuality will be reflected in the structure of modern society, and we shall see – in the form of civil society. This necessary articulation of the polity to take account of the greater complexity of man requires a balance between institutions which Hegel thinks is incompatible with direct democracy. More of this below.

This beautiful unity of the Greek state is doomed. It is doomed because of its limitations, its parochialness. The world spirit has to march on. Hence once the polis is realized the cunning of reason calls world-historical individuals to look beyond. Such a figure in his own way is Socrates. Socrates turns his allegiance to universal reason. And although he wants to remain obedient to the laws of his polis, he would like to found them on reason. Thus while he maintains his allegiance to Athens to the death, nevertheless his teaching cannot but corrupt the youth, for it undermines that immediate identification with the public life on which the polis rests. Men turn to a universal reason, turn their back on the parochial state and its gods. But this universal reason is not embodied in public life, it is the beyond.

The dissolution of the polity is the birth of the individual with universal consciousness. This is an individual who defines himself as subject of universal reason. But he can find no identification with the public life of his city. He lives in a larger community, the city of men and Gods of the Stoics, but this is unrealized. Hence the new individual is an internal émigré.

But this has the necessary consequence that the life goes out of the public institutions of the polis. It cannot but go under and gives way to the universal empire, a form of dominance from on top which is predicated precisely on their being no such identification. This universal empire is no more than the polis a realization of the universal reason which has now come to consciousness. It is the correlative in the sense that the individual of universal reason must bring about the collapse of the city-state, but it is not at all expression in public life of this reason. On the contrary, it is the expression of the fact that this reason is now felt as beyond the world. Thus the individual is cast into an external world which is ruled not by reason but by the arbitrary will of emperors, powerful despots. Internally he defines himself as universal reason, but externally he is a bit of flotsam on the huge flood of events, entirely at the mercy of external power.

In this diremption he goes even more to an inward definition of himself. This is the age in which Stoicism flourishes. But for Hegel, this cannot be a solution, for it is a completely unrealized figure of reason and freedom. Hence the individual cannot but yearn to go beyond this, to find realization. The ground is laid for the unhappy consciousness.

This is the era of the Roman Empire. Thus Roman society is the place of origin of the idea of the Person, an individual defined as a subject of rights in abstraction from his relation to the substance of Sittlichkeit. The Person is the bearer of ‘abstract’ right, right unconnected to social and political role; he is the bearer of right as property. This will be one of the dimensions of the modern state. It has its origins here.

The stage is set for the birth of Christianity. Christianity comes to answer the yearning of the universal individual, who cannot be reconciled with the universal in this political world, that nevertheless the finite subject and the absolute be fully united. And so they become so united once, in the person of Christ. There is no question of this happening many times, as with the avatars of Hindu religion. The absolute is one, and the paradigmatic founding unity can only be realized once. But this unity, as we have seen, must also be overcome in its immediate form. Christ must die. And he must rise again, go to the Father, and return in spirit to animate the community.

But with the birth of Christianity this unity is only realized in principle. It is still not fully realized in the world. The Church which is the external realization of the new community is thus in inner exile at first as well, just like the universal individual. The task of history now is to make this reconciliation externally, politically real; to make the church community in a sense one with the society. And this means a slow transformation of institutions, and a slow making over of men – Bildung. This is the task of the next eighteen centuries, and it will be undertaken by a new world-historical people, the Germanic nations.

The German nations Hegel means are the barbarians who swarmed over the Roman empire at its end and founded the new nations of Western Europe. There is no particular chauvinism in this use of the word German. Montesquieu and others also recognized that modern European polities had issued out of these Germanic barbarian kingdoms.

But these Germans were ideally suited to take history to the next stage – the Weltgeist always sees to such convergence of material and ends – because they were naturally very conscious of their individual independence from authority. They were only with difficulty, and then precariously, submitted to authority. Hegel pictures the early German as being loosely under leaders who, like Agamemnon, were barely primus inter pares. In this way, they were as it were pre-programmed to build a civilization which would be based on the freedom of the individual. But first this freedom has to be purified, it has to grow into and incorporate the rational inner freedom which was achieved by the ancient word and Christianity. The real, external independence of the German in the woods has to be united to this spiritual freedom, and this freedom given reality. But second, it is essential to this that the wild independent German must learn to accept rational authority, must accept to be integrated into a rational state.

The development of medieval and modern Europe is the working out of these two related processes. The feudal system in which the public realm is shot through with private relationships is the natural form in which these German tribes set up states. But then the process starts by which these loose skeins of private relations are united into the common overarching will which is inseparable from the state. In Europe this comes in the form of the growing power of the monarchy. Charlemagne represents a crucial phase in this process.

We have here the foundation of one of the essential features of a modern state for Hegel. It must be united at the top by a monarchy. Hegel seems to hold that this is essentially linked with the principle of modern individual freedom. The Greek city-state could be a republic since all gave themselves immediately to the state, they had no private will outside it. But the modern universal individual also has a private identity, he cannot be simply a member of the state. In order to be real as a common will, any state must however have this moment of immediate unity in it. At some moment, at some point, the will of the whole must be one with a real existent will. This not just in the sense that in order for the state to act, some men must act in its name. Rather Hegel is making the ontological point that there must be some place in which the immediate unity of concrete and general will is realized. The state cannot be for everybody just one dimension among many of their action and will.

What Hegel is presenting here, and later in the PR, is a renewed variant of the medieval idea of the representative individual, that is, an individual who bodies forth a basic principle of the common life. This is ‘representation’ not in the modern sense of standing in for someone else or being delegated by him, but of bodying forth, of incarnating an underlying common reality to which all show allegiance. The notion of kingly majesty, that the king is the point at which the majesty of the whole is manifest, belongs to this idea. In the ontological dimension of his political thought, where he is concerned to derive the structures of the state from the ‘Concept’, that is, from the ontological structure of things, Hegel has recourse to an idea of this kind. Different features of the constitution ‘represent’ in this sense different aspects of ontological reality.

Alongside the powerful monarch, who draws together the unruly subjects, there grow up the institutions known as estates, which in England became Parliament. These are the necessary mediating elements between the sovereign will and the particulars. And hence we have here another essential institution of a modern state, thinks Hegel. It is by the estates that the people as a whole take part in the life of the state. Here again we shall see that Hegel’s notion of the participation of the people is not founded on the modern notion of representation, as it is in theories of modern representative government. It is not a matter of legitimating decisions, by leading them back to popular choices, but of establishing some kind of identification.

At the same time the state develops more and more towards impersonality, the dependence on law, and what Weber was later to call rationality. The kingly power becomes less and less a private appanage, and is seen as the public power of government. Service by magnates is replaced over the centuries by a trained bureaucracy. The state becomes more and more founded on general principles, on legal rationality.

As these institutions are developing – to what final fruition we shall discuss further below – the parallel process of spiritualization is going on, purification of the raw, primitive human material, and its formation (Bildung). One of the key stages in this is the Reformation. The Christian Church took over a good part of the task of forming the raw barbarians. But in the process it had to sink to some degree to their level. The higher spiritual truths of Christianity were united with gross external realities. Men tried to find God by the actual physical conquest of the Holy Land, the presence of God was reified in the host, and so on. This is Hegel’s notion of what underlay medieval Catholicism. In order for the spirit to progress, there had to be a recovery of purity, a rediscovery of the spiritual meaning of the presence of the spirit in the world, a setting aside of the gross sensuous meaning this had with Catholicism. This is essential to the development of the modern state; so much so that Catholic countries are incapable of realizing this state integrally.

With the Reformation, and the freeing of spirituality from its imprisonment in gross external things, with the recovery of a sense of the presence of God in the community which was purely spiritual, the way was free for the task of making this presence objective and real in the external world, not in the gross and inadequate way of the external rites and hierarchy of Catholicism, but by building a real earthly community which would realize the universal, reason. The world was ready for a state founded on reason. In other words, the unity of God and man has to be externally realized. But we have to go beyond the primitive, purely external, and hence totally inadequate realization in host, sanctuary, relics, indulgences, etc.; we have to liberate the true spiritual dimension, if we are to achieve the adequate realization in a political community. Thus from the Reformed Europe comes the attempt to realize the rational state, to overcome the opposition of Church and state. The Protestant religion is at the foundation of this state.

The spiritualization process begun by the Reformation, however, carries on and brings about what we call the Enlightenment. More and more aware of themselves as at one with the universal, men come to recognize that they are inwardly free with the freedom of pure thought. The spiritualization brings them back to an understanding of their identity as resting in the freedom of universal thought. But this is not simply a return to the ancients. For these latter found themselves faced with a world which was totally refractory to reason; their sense of their identity as reason was a purely inner one, buffeted by the forces of the world; the world of reason was a beyond. But since then men have come to see that they are at one with the very foundation of things. Christian culture has wrought this. Consequently the modern Enlightenment does not just define man as thought, it is sure that the whole of external reality conforms to thought too. This is Hegel’s reading of the new scientific consciousness which strives to understand the world as law-governed order.

In other words, thought and being are one. This is Hegel’s rather idiosyncratic reading of the Cogito ergo sum of Descartes. The point is that man is reason, and he is as such one with the principle of things; so he will find reason in the external world if he only looks for it.7

This spiritualization completes the process of the desacralization (Entgotte-rung) of things. The world becomes a set of external realities simply laid out before human consciousness, transparent to it. But we might ask, why should Enlightenment mean Entgôtterung? Surely religion too, of the purified kind, sees thought behind all reality. The answer is, of course, that at base the Enlightenment is at one with purified religion; its battle with religion is based on self-illusion, as Hegel tried to show in a passage of the PhG discussion. But this self-illusion is its crucial flaw. It sees itself as purely human. It comes to an understanding of itself as reason, that is, of man’s self as reason; to a vision of the world of external reality as subject to reason, but it loses its sense of the larger cosmic self, Geist, which is the fundamental locus of reason.

This Hegel sees as grounded in the fact that the Enlightenment remains at the level of Verstand, that is, at the level where thought clearly distinguishes things and separates them but without going beyond to the level of Vernunft, where we see the inner connections which link all separate realities, the dialectical life which engenders them all in a chain. Hence the Enlightenment distinguishes clearly and has a vision of men as individuals, independent of each other, but it loses sight of the community in which they are set. Its political theory is atomistic. Hence, too, the Enlightenment sees merely external, individual objects in the world that surrounds us; it does not also see the world as an order posited by God, Geist or reason. What the Enlightenment sees is true, but fatally partial. Thus it desacralizes, for it only sees the world as a heap of objects, open to human scrutiny and use; it does not see it also as manifestation, the emanation of reason.

This is the reason why the value theory of the Enlightenment is utilitarian. All objects are seen as lying to hand. The dimension in which they are manifestation of something higher which would require an attitude of respect is occluded. Their only value must lie outside themselves, in their use for subjects, for men. Consequently, the universal category of value is an extrinsic one, what is the utility of a thing, an action, a policy? What are its consequences for human desire?

In this way the Enlightenment inevitably comes into conflict with religion. Really the conflict as was said above is based on self-illusion on both sides. But this illusion is itself real and powerful. The only way the Enlightenment can accommodate Geist, the cosmic subject, is by emptying him of all content. He can no longer be a subject, and active; for there is only room for human subjects and law-governed nature. God thus must be reduced to the impersonal and colourless ‘supreme being’ of Deism. In other words, the principle of the totality becomes empty. And in this, Hegel argues, the materialist and the deist forms of the Enlightenment are not that far from each other. For the ‘matter’ of the materialists is also a purely empty, colourless category. It is indistinguishable from the être suprème.

Confident in himself as Reason and in reason as mastery over reality, the man of the Enlightenment rejects all authority and sets out to shape reality to reason, i.e., to himself. But this is where his onesidedness turns out to be disastrous. For once we lose sight of Geist, the form of reason remains but the substantive content is lost, that is, we have no longer a vision of the ontological structure of things, which all that we live in must conform to if it is to be adequate to reason. We are all ready to master the world, and to shape it, but we have lost the plan. In our desperation to find an alternative we tear things to pieces.

The lack of content of reason in the vision of the Enlightenment can be seen first if we probe its basic system of valuation, utilitarianism. The principle of utility assesses the value of things extrinsically, by how they serve the ends of man. But where should this process stop? With the de facto desires of man? But why should we stop here? Men with their desires, are themselves external facts in the world; why should not they too be evaluated extrinsically in the interest of ‘society’, or the future? We are in danger of falling into a senseless regress, what Hegel calls a ‘bad infinite’. The point of this criticism is not just to lay bare a problem for the justification of utilitarian ethics, but to identify a real tendency in the system. Utilitarian thought can step over the brink in which man becomes means and not end, as for instance with reforms like the English Poor Law of 1834, which put the unemployed into work-houses for the sake of general utility. For it lacks a notion of intrinsic good.

And it is the more easy to step over this brink in that the criterion of de facto desire cannot work in practice. For desires are too varied and contradictory, between and within people. Moral conflict breaks out between desires, and some criterion of intrinsic goodness, that is, of what makes a desire good, has to be found.

In addition, in order to make our desires real in the world of history, we have to achieve common goals. For the only self-subsistent reality is a community, and any shaping of things which will be self-subsistent must be the shaping of a whole community. There must be a common aspiration.

Now this fact seems to provide the answer which we were looking for above, a criterion for judging between desires. Those desires are to be followed which are truly general, which are for the good of all, and not just of oneself. We have the basis here for the idea of the general will. This is the other great discovery of Enlightenment ethical theory. Man shapes his society according to right reason by founding it fully on the general will. For the rational is the universal, that which holds for all men and is binding on all men.

The step from utilitarianism to general will theory is an attempt, as we saw in the last chapter, to achieve a more integral realization of reason. The ethic of utility has to take an arbitrary final point in de facto human desire, something which is just given. The ethic of the general will promises to go beyond what is just given, what men happen to want, to ends derived from the rational will itself.

This is in any case how Hegel sees the step taken by Rousseau and later developed by Kant. But this new theory is as incapable as its predecessor of developing a content, a set of substantive goals out of the idea of reason, because as we saw it remains centred on the free, rational will of man. It remains like utilitarianism in the domain of ‘understanding’ (Verstand) which separates finite from infinite, and cannot see that finite spirits are linked into the larger reality of Geist.

The ethic of the general will, of formal universality, remained empty.

But it is one thing to weave empty ethical theories in one’s study; it is another thing to try to put this empty general will into reality in history. The Germans only did the first; but the French tried the second, and the terrible, destructive consequences revealed what was implicit in this emptiness and showed the need to go beyond to another stage. This traumatic, climactic event was the French Revolution (cf. PR, § 258).

3
We come now to the great political event of Hegel’s youth, the event against which all his generation had to think out their political philosophy, and had to rethink their stance to the Enlightenment. For Hegel, as we see, the disaster of the Jacobin Terror, the excesses of the Revolution as it went off the rails, are to be understood from the root inadequacy of the Enlightenment.

The aspiration to remake the world entirely according to the prescriptions of rational will is the aspiration to ‘absolute freedom’. But this arises essentially out of the whole modern development of which Reformation and Enlightenment are phases. The basic insight underlying this development is that the world is posited by Spirit, that we are at one with the very foundation of things, or that thought and being are one. But thought or Spirit is identified simply with those of man. Hence the whole of society is seen as reposing on human will alone. To remake it according to reason is to rebuild it entirely according to the prescriptions of human will, and thus to realize an unrestricted, unconditioned freedom.

With this, Spirit is present as absolute freedom; it is self-consciousness which understands itself, and from this understands that its certainty of self is the essence of all the spiritual structures [Massen] of the real as well as the supersensible world, or conversely, that essence and reality are the knowledge of consciousness of itself.

(PhG, 415)

This aspiration wreaks terrible destruction. We saw in the discussion of the Terror in the PhG, that the root failure of the drive to absolute freedom is that it cannot accept the differentiation which is essential for society. Its vacuity condemns it to unmitigated destructiveness. But we were not in a position to understand then why differentiation is essential to modern society. We began to see the reason for this in the last chapter, in that the articulations of the Concept must be matched in the state. But in examining more closely why this articulation must be and why the aspiration to absolute freedom cannot provide it, we shall get to the heart of Hegel’s theory of the modern state.

The society of absolute freedom must be entirely the creation of its members. First, it must be such that everything in it is the fruit of human will and decision. And secondly, the decisions must be taken with the real participation of all.8 This condition, which we can call universal and total participation, is one in which all have a say in the whole decision.

This contrasts with an arrangement whereby a group may distribute functions, so that one sub-group has the responsibility for determining one aspect of things, another the responsibility for another, and so on. We can say of this group, too, that the total outcome is determined by the will of the members; but it is not true of the individual members, perhaps of any individual members, that they took a decision concerning the total outcome, or had a voice in such a decision in the sense of voting on the total outcome along with others.

Thus an ideal free enterprise economy in which all men are independent entrepreneurs is one in which the outcome is determined by the decisions of members, but where no-one has taken a decision or participated in a decision about the total outcome. Alternatively a traditional society may have a structure with differentiated roles which is considered as outside the realm of decision. This structure in turn will determine how and by whom those matters are decided which remain within the realm of decision. In all likelihood, this structure will relate different people differently to the decisions to be taken; so that some will fall to the chief, say, others to the elders, others to the medicine man, some to the women, others again will be the responsibility of the whole people. Perhaps, too, even when the whole people decide, the manner of the decision will be determined by the structure, say, they vote to accept or refuse proposals framed by the elders.

The society which aims at absolute freedom must be unlike both the free enterprise and the traditional society models briefly adumbrated. Unlike the latter, it cannot allow for structures which are beyond the reach of decision, which are supposedly rooted in the nature of things, the will of the Gods, time-hallowed law, and so on. It is the nature of the Enlightenment as Hegel saw not to accept any such authority. Everything must be thought out from the ground up by human reason and decided according to reason by human will. To use a term which Hegel employs in one of his early theological writings, the rational will cannot accept the merely ‘positive’, that is, institutions and structures which are simply there, simply in being, without being rationally justified, shown to be necessary or desirable by reason. Hence it is that the state founded on the general will contains no structures which are not themselves the result of decision, save simply those which are essentially part of the process of decision itself which yields the general will: that deliberation be in general assembly, by free discussion, without factions, etc. But all else, the form of the government, who is to fill the roles of government, the rights of property, all these are decided. There are not even entrenched individual rights, matters taken outside the sphere of government, as there are with Locke.

Absolute freedom thus rejects structures which are not founded on will, the fruit of decision. But at the same time it rejects the other model, which is instantiated for instance in the free enterprise economy. This, too, be it noted, has broken with the traditional society. It is a child of the Enlightenment. It need have no ‘positive’institutions, save the institutions of property, and those which go along with its exchange and alienation, contract, buying, selling, etc., in other words institutions which are essential to the type of decisions which it makes central, decisions of individual entrepreneurs concerning the disposal of their property. No structure founded on the authority of tradition, the divine the order of things, is to be respected or obeyed. Only those are taken as fundamental which are essential to the exercise of rational human will. In this way, the free enterprise society is similar to the society of absolute freedom. Where they differ profoundly is in their conception of the exercise of rational will. In one case this is expressed in the decisions of individuals about their good, in the other rather in decisions of the whole society about their common affairs. One is the realm of the particular, the other of the general will. The root structures of each are meant to make possible the respective paradigm decisions of each. But the general will model cannot accept the model of free enterprise, for even though this latter rejects the ‘positive‘, it remains true that the total outcome is not the fruit of will and decision. Each man decides for himself, and hence the outcome in so far as it results from this decision is his own. But he has only a relatively minor effect on the whole outcome. For the rest he is faced by conditions which he did not make, which are the fruit of hundreds of other wills, each one of whom is in a similar predicament. The way these wills concatenate is a function of blind natural law, not will. But if the point of freedom is that what I live should be decided by myself, then to the extent that I live in conditions which are only partly the fruit of my decision, to that extent I am not integrally free.

Complete freedom would require that the whole outcome be decided by me. But of course, since the whole outcome is a social one, it cannot be decided by me alone. Or rather, if I decide it alone, then no one else who lives under this outcome is free. If we are all to be free, we must all take the decision. But this means that we must all take the whole decision, we must all participate in a decision about the nature of the total outcome. There must be universal and total participation. Participation must be not only universal, that is, involving everybody, but in this sense total, that all have a say in the whole decision. Of course, even this is not enough. If there are irreconcilable differences of view, so that some of us are voted down and forced to knuckle under, then we will be unfree, coerced. The theory of absolute freedom thus requires some notion of the unanimity of our real will; and this is what we have in the theory of the general will.

The aspiration to universal and total participation seems to be implicit in the formula in Rousseau’s Contrat Social, where the aim is to find a form of association which man can enter, and yet while obeying only himself remain as free as before. The notion of ‘obeying only oneself’ requires that the laws under which one lives should result totally from one’s decision. The only way to reconcile this with life in society is by the universal and total participation which is the formula of the general will.

But then it is clear that the aspiration to absolute freedom cannot consort with any articulated differentiation of the society. The only structures which can be accepted as untouchable are those which underlie the taking of decisions. But these have to be totally taken by all. Thus these structures have to be based on and ensure the maximum homogeneity of citizens. For if all are to take the total decision, then in this crucial respect all are to be seen as identical. Moreover among those institutions which are created by the society none can be allowed which would negate this fundamental likeness and equality of all in taking the decisions. For instance, if it turns out to be necessary to this end that property be equalized (Rousseau thought so), then this will have to be done. No differentiations can be allowed which entail different relations to the process of decision, not even those which would have this as indirect result, such as inequality in property. The society must be a homogeneous one. Under the sovereignty of the general will, differences are of course allowed and necessary. Some men must fulfill the roles of government. But this is seen on the Rousseauian scheme as simply carrying out the decisions made by the whole, the putting into practice of the general will. And this role-differentiation must on no account reflect back on the process where legislation is passed.

The demands of absolute freedom therefore rule out any differentiation of the society into estates, different social groups identified by their ways of living and making a living, who would be differently related to the government of the society. And they also rule out any differentiation of the political system along the lines of the division of powers. For here, too, different groups take decisions affecting only part of the outcome. Indeed, the presupposition of a division of powers which can be meaningful as a system of checks and balances is that each of the powers be exercised by different people, hence not more than one by the whole, and the others by less than the whole. But no decisions of significance can be taken by less than the whole if we are to keep to the exigencies of absolute freedom. We can allow for the delegation of purely executive decision, but not for any which affects the design of our society, or the laws we live under. The general will theory cannot admit of representative institutions, as we see with Rousseau.

Hence the aspiration of absolute freedom contradicts Hegel’s notion of what is necessary for a rational state in ruling out differentiation. I have said above that we can find warrant for this belief in differentiation in Hegel’s ontology. But this deeper ontological ground meshed with insights Hegel gleaned from the history of his time as he saw it. I mentioned above in connection with Hegel’s discussion of the polis, that he held it to be no model for the modern state. Direct democracy was possible then because societies were small, because they were homogeneous by virtue of relegating many functions to slaves and me tics, and because the individualism of modern times had not yet developed. All these changes in the modern world which mark it off from the polis make differentiation unavoidable in Hegel’s view. And in some of this reasoning, Hegel is far from alone in contemporary thought and judgement.

It is now a commonplace that the size of the modern state makes it impossible for all to rule together under a system of universal and total participation. There must be representation. So that the contemporary protagonists of total participation – and they are perhaps more numerous today than ever before – follow Rousseau in opting for a radical decentralization of power as the only solution.

But although the size of the modern state may make some differentiation of political roles unavoidable, it does not show that there must be social differentiation and that this must have relevance for the process of decision. But this is the force of the Hegelian notion of ‘estates’ (Stände) into which society is articulated. For these have not only each a distinct economic base and mode of life, but are also related each in its own way to the process of government.

Hegel’s account of the different estates differs slightly between his works in the early 1800s and the mature version of the PR, but basically he singles out the following groups: (1) the peasantry, (2) the land-owning classes, (3) the business class, and (4) the class of professionals and functionaries which could staff the administration of the modern state. He also observed the beginnings of (5) a proletariat, with misgivings, one might even say dismay. He saw this more as a catastrophe to be avoided than as a new group which had to find its own characteristic way of integrating into the state.

In order to understand Hegel’s views, we have to remember that these social groups were much more sharply marked off from each other than the classes of contemporary society. Then the peasants on the land, the urban bourgeoisie, and in some countries the landed aristocracy, were indeed strikingly different in oudook, style of life, interest in politics, conception of political life, and so on. The development of modern society, partly under the impulse of general will theory and Enlightenment modes of thought generally, has been towards a greater and greater homogenization, and in this respect a modern Western society would be unrecognizable to a man of early nineteenth-century Europe (though America at that time already gave a foretaste of what was coming, as de Tocqueville saw).

But faced with the differences he witnessed in his day, Hegel reasoned that the idea of universal and total participation was chimaerical. The modern state, as against the ancient polis, aims at universal citizenship. This means that all economic functions will be exercised by citizens. But visibly, Hegel thought, these different tasks go along with very different outlooks, modes of life, values and life-styles. So that, first of all, these different ‘estates’, would have to have an important life of their own which would not be under the jurisdiction of the state as a whole. (This only really had application for the land-owning and bourgeois classes; Hegel did not consider the peasants capable of self-government, nor the proletariat; but in this he was far from exceptional in the Europe of his day where these classes were almost universally without the franchise.) And secondly, because of this, they would require a different relation to the business of government. (We will see later how Hegel used this to justify legislatures on the model of the traditional European estates-general, where the nobility took part in person and the commons by representatives.) Both these requirements involve a breach in the principle of universal and total participation.

In this predicament of real-life differentiation, it was chimaerical to seek to place everyone on the same footing at the centre of the total decision-making. The groups would naturally want in some areas to take partial decisions on their own. And for the rest, their way of relating to and identifying with the whole would be profoundly different. The peasant class for instance in Hegel’s view was steeped in an unreflective adherence to the Sitten of the nation; their basic reaction was one of trust (Vertrauen) to their natural leaders. They did not require to be at the centre of decision in order to identify with the result, to sense it as their own.

In a different way the burghers, given over largely to the pursuit of their private gain, production and exchange, have on the whole neither time nor inclination to give themselves over totally to the res publica. They are more happily and appropriately related to the process of government by representatives. The class of land-owners is, on the other hand, one whose whole life is meant to be given in service. It is no question of their being related at second hand to public affairs.

In talking of the burghers we touch on the third reason Hegel gave differentiating our predicament from that of the ancient polis. We have developed a consciousness of the individual which had no place in the ancient polis, which indeed brought about its demise. This consciousness of the individual as simply a man, and as significant for that reason, that is, neither as Athenian or Spartan, German or French, Jew or Gentile, is what is expressed in what Hegel calls ‘civil society’ which we can roughly think of as the bourgeois economy. Modern man has an extra dimension of complexity as compared to the ancients. He is not simply a citizen of his country, he also thinks of himself as a man tout court, and this is a significant part of his identity since man as such is a bearer of universal reason.

It follows that not all men can give themselves totally to the public life. For some of the energy of most men will be engaged by the private. But since the state can only be if some men identify totally with it and make its life their life, there must be a political division of labour. Hence once more universal and total participation is impossible. The class which most gives itself to the private is the bourgeois class; hence they are happy to be represented by some of their number in the direction of affairs. But there is another group, which in the earlier Jena variants of Hegel’s theory is the aristocracy, and which later is the bureaucracy or universal class, which gives itself totally to the affairs of the state.

We might think of coping with this third difficulty by breeding a society of all-round men who could at once each have a full range of private occupations and also all participate fully in the life of the state. But Hegel rejects this possibility for two reasons. First, his theory of man’s individual career is that we only achieve something significant by giving ourselves fully to it, and that means renouncing other things.9 Those who pine after everything achieve nothing. The fully realized is the particularized. Hegel’s ontology and worldly wisdom come together here.

But behind this notion of necessary specialization in society there are also the requirements of the Idea. These were that the different facets of the concept find embodiment in the state. But the fullest embodiment of an articulated whole is when its varied facets are realized in different parts or organs. To be mingled in undifferentiated form is a more primitive stage. Thus the fully developed state is one in which the different moments of the Concept – immediate unity, separation, and mediated unity – are realized in separate groups, each with the appropriate mode of life. This is the dialectical derivation of the estates of modern society from the Concept, which we shall examine in the next chapter.

Thus Hegel’s understanding of the inescapable diversity of modern society converges with his ontological vision. They lead him to the conclusion that the real differentiation of economic, social and political roles which is unavoidable in a society which does not shunt menial functions off onto non-citizens brings with it inescapably differences of culture, values and mode of life. These in turn demand a certain measure of autonomous life within each estate, and even more, they make the way that each estate can and wants to relate to the whole different. This is why the aspiration to absolute freedom is misplaced and vain, and this for reasons which are much more fundamental than those which relate to the size of the modern state, serious as these are.

We might be tempted to conclude that Hegel is just wrong and reactionary on this issue, and that developments since have shown this. Of course, his first argument about the size of a modern polity is well taken. And he is also right that modern man has a private dimension which makes it difficult if not unlikely that men can ever again all give themselves so thoroughly to the public life of their society as in earlier ages. But on social differentiation he has surely just been proved wrong. The great homogenization of modern society shows that however varied may be the functions performed by citizens they can develop to a unity of outlook and life-style which puts paid to any argument for different relations to the process of decision. The increasing ‘classlessness’ of modern society seems to point in this direction. Of course, Hegel was more realistic in his day than those who believed in what was then an ‘abstract’ equality. But they turn out to be more far-seeing in that they foretold the homogeneity which a society founded on this doctrine could bring about.

But if we abstract from the particular application of Hegel’s theory to the ‘estates’ of his day, there is an important issue which is far from being decided today. What kind of differentiation can modern society admit of? There is a dilemma here which we have yet to resolve.

We can see the aspiration to what Hegel calls ‘absolute freedom’, or universal and total participation, as the attempt to meet an endemic need of modern society. Traditional societies were founded on differentiation: royalty, aristocracy, common folk; priests and laymen; free and serf, and so on. This differentiation was justified as a reflection of a hierarchical order of things. After the revolution of modern, self-defining subjectivity, these conceptions of cosmic order came to be seen as fictions, and were denounced as fraudulent inventions of kings, priests, aristocrats, etc. to keep their subjects submissive. But however much they may have been used, consciously or not, as justifications of the status quo, these conceptions also were the ground of men’s identification with the society in which they lived. Man could only be himself in relation to a cosmic order; the state claimed to body forth this order and hence to be one of men’s principal channels of contact with it. Hence the power of organic and holistic metaphors: men saw themselves as parts of society in something like the way that a hand, for instance, is part of the body.

The revolution of modern subjectivity gave rise to another type of political theory. Society was justified not by what it was or expressed, but by what it achieved, the fulfilment of men’s needs, desires and purposes. Society came to be seen as an instrument and its different modes and structures were to be studied scientifically for their effects on human happiness. Political theory would banish myth and fable. This reached clearest expression in utilitarianism.

But this modern theory has not provided a basis for men’s identification with their society. In the intermittent crises of alienation which have followed the breakdown of traditional society, utilitarian theories have been powerless to fill the gap. So that modern societies have actually functioned with a large part of their traditional outlook intact, or only slowly receding, as in the case of Britain, for instance. Or when some radical break is sought, they have had recourse to more powerful stuff, some variant of the general will tradition (Jacobinism, Marxism, anarchism) as a revolutionary ideology. Or modern societies have had recourse either in revolutionary or ‘normal’ times to the powerful secular religion of nationalism. And even societies which seem to be founded on the utilitarian tradition, or an earlier, Lockeian variant, like the United States, in fact have recourse to ‘myth’, e.g., the myth of the frontier, of the perpetual new beginning, the future as boundlessly open to self-creation.

This last is the greatest irony of all, in that the utilitarian theory itself leaves no place for myth of this kind, that is, speculative interpretation of the ends of human life in their relation to society, nature and history, as part of the justifying beliefs of a mature society. These are thought to belong to earlier, less evolved ages. Mature men are attached to their society because of what it produces for them. As recently as a decade ago this perspective was widely believed in by the liberal intelligentsia of America and the Western world, who announced an imminent ‘end of ideology’. But they turned out to be latter-day, inverted variants of Monsieur Jourdain, who were speaking not prose, but myth without knowing it. It is now clearer that the utilitarian perspective is no less an ideology than its major rivals, and no more plausible. Utilitarian man whose loyalty to his society would be contingent only on the satisfactions it secured for him is a species virtually without members. And the very notion of satisfaction is now not so firmly anchored, once we see that it is interwoven with ‘expectations’, and beliefs about what is appropriate and just. Some of the richest societies in our day are among the most teeming with dissatisfaction, for instance, the U.S.A.

The aspiration to absolute freedom can be seen as an attempt to fill this lack in modern political theory, to find ground for identification with one’s society which are fully in the spirit of modern subjectivity. We have grounds for identifying ourselves with our society and giving our full allegiance to it when it is ours in the strong sense of being our creation, and moreover the creation of what is best in us and mostly truly ourselves: our moral will (Rousseau, Fichte), or our creative activity (Marx). From Rousseau through Marx and the anarchist thinkers to contemporary theories of participatory democracy, there have been recurrent demands to reconstruct society, so as to do away with heteronomy, or overcome alienation, or recover spontaneity. Only a society which was an emanation of free moral will could recover a claim on our allegiance comparable to that of traditional society. For once more society would reflect or embody something of absolute value. Only this would no longer be a cosmic order, but in keeping with the modern revolution, the absolute would be human freedom itself.

The aspiration to absolute freedom is therefore born of a deep dissatisfaction with the utilitarian model of society as an instrument for the furtherance/adjustment of interests. Societies built on this model are experienced as a spiritual desert, or as a machine. They express nothing spiritual, and their regulations and discipline are felt as an intolerable imposition by those who aspire to absolute freedom. It is therefore not surprising that the theorists of absolute freedom have often been close to the reactionary critics of liberal society, and have often themselves expressed admiration for earlier societies.

Hegel understood this aspiration. As we saw he made the demand for radical autonomy a central part of his theory. He has indeed, an important place in the line of development of this aspiration to absolute freedom as it develops from Rousseau through Marx and beyond. For he wove the demand for radical autonomy of Rousseau and Kant together with the expressivist theory which came from Herder, and this provided the indispensable background for Marx’s thought. And yet he was a strong critic of radical freedom. This alone would make it worthwhile to examine his objections.

Disentangled from Hegel’s particular theory of social differentiation, the basic point of this critique is this: absolute freedom requires homogeneity. It cannot brook differences which would prevent everyone participating totally in the decisions of the society. And what is even more, it requires some near unanimity of will to emerge from this deliberation, for otherwise the majority would just be imposing its will on the minority, and freedom would not be universal. But differentiation of some fairly essential kinds are ineradicable. (Let us leave aside for the moment the objection that Hegel did not identify the right ones.) And moreover, they are recognized in our post-Romantic climate as essential to human identity. Men cannot simply identify themselves as men, but they define themselves more immediately by their partial community, cultural, linguistic, confessional, etc. Modern democracy is therefore in a bind.

I think a dilemma of this kind can be seen in contemporary society. Modern societies have moved towards much greater homogeneity and greater interdependence, so that partial communities lose their autonomy and to some extent their identity. But great differences remain; only because of the ideology of homogeneity, these differential characteristics no longer have meaning and value for those who have them. Thus the rural population is taught by the mass media to see itself as just lacking in some of the advantages of a more advanced life style. The poor are seen as marginal to the society, for instance, in America, and in some ways have a worse lot than in more recognizedly class-divided societies.

Homogenization thus increases minority alienation and resentment. And the first response of liberal society is to try even more of the same: programmes to eliminate poverty, or assimilate Indians, move population out of declining regions, bring an urban way of life to the countryside, etc. But the radical response is to convert this sense of alienation into a demand for ‘absolute freedom’. The idea is to overcome alienation by creating a society in which everyone, including the present ‘out’ groups, participate fully in the decisions.

But both these solutions would simply aggravate the problem, which is that homogenization has undermined the communities or characteristics by which people formerly identified themselves and put nothing in their place. What does step into the gap almost everywhere is ethnic or national identity. Nationalism has become the most powerful focus of identity in modern society. The demand for radical freedom can and frequently does join up with nationalism, and is given a definite impetus and direction from this.

But unless this happens, the aspiration to absolute freedom is unable to resolve the dilemma. It attempts to overcome the alienation of a mass society by mass participation. But the very size, complexity and inter-dependence of modern society makes this increasingly difficult on technical grounds alone. What is more serious, the increasing alienation in a society which has eroded its traditional foci of allegiance makes it harder and harder to achieve the basic consensus, to bring everyone to the ‘general will’, which is essential for radical democracy. As the traditional limits fade with the grounds for accepting them, society tends to fragment, partial groups become increasingly truculent in their demands, as they see less reason to compromise with the ‘system’.

But the radical demand for participation can do nothing to stem this fragmentation. Participation of all in a decision is only possible if there is a ground of agreement, or of underlying common purpose. Radical participation cannot create this; it presupposes it. This is the point which Hegel repeatedly makes. The demand for absolute freedom by itself is empty. Hegel stresses one line of possible consequences, that emptiness lead to pure destructiveness. But he also mentions another in his discussion in the PhG. For in fact some direction has to be given to society, and hence a group can take over and imprint its own purpose on society claiming to represent the general will. They thus ‘solve’ the problem of diversity by force. Contemporary communist societies provide examples of this. And whatever can be said for them they can certainly not be thought of as models of freedom. Moreover their solution to the emptiness of absolute freedom is in a sense only provisional. The problem of what social goals to choose or structures to adopt is solved by the exigencies of mobilization and combat towards the free society. Society can be set a definite task because A. has to build the preconditions of communism, either in defeating class enemies or in constructing a modern economy. Such societies would be in disarray if ever the period of mobilization were to end (which is why it would end only over the dead bodies of the ruling party).

But an ideology of participation which does not want to take this totalitarian road of general mobilization cannot cope with the complexity and fragmentation of a large-scale contemporary society. Many of its protagonists see this, and return to the original Rousseauian idea of a highly decentralized federation of communities. But in the meantime the growth of a large homogeneous society has made this much less feasible. It is not just that with our massive concentrations of population and economic interdependence a lot of decisions have to be taken for the whole society, and decentralization gives us no way of coping with these. More serious is the fact that homogenization has undermined the partial communities which would naturally have been the basis of such a decentralized federation in the past. There is no advantage in an artificial carving up of society into manageable units. If in fact no one identifies strongly with these units, participation will be minimal, as we see in much of our urban politics today.

Thus Hegel’s dilemma for modern democracy, put at its simplest, is this: The modern ideology of equality and of total participation leads to a homogenization of society. This shakes men loose from their traditional communities, but cannot replace them as a focus of identity. Or rather, it can only replace them as such a focus under the impetus of militant nationalism or some totalitarian ideology which would depreciate or even crush diversity and individuality. It would be a focus for some and would reduce the others to mute alienation. Hegel constantly stresses that the tight unity of the Greek city-state cannot be recaptured in the modern world that has known the principle of individual freedom.

Thus the attempt to fill the gap by moving towards a society of universal and total participation, where it is not actually harmful in suppressing freedom, is vain. It can only aggravate the problem by intensifying homogenization, while offering no relief since absolute freedom by itself is empty and cannot offer a focus of identity. And besides, total participation is unrealizable in a large-scale society. In fact ideologies of absolute freedom only produce something in the hands of a minority with a powerful vision which it is willing to impose.

The only real cure for this malady, a recovery of meaningful differentiation, is closed for modern society precisely because of its commitment to ideologies which constantly press it towards greater homogeneity. Some of the differences which remain are depreciated, and are breeding grounds for alienation and resentment. Others in fact fill the gap and become foci of identity. These are principally ethnic or national differences. But they tend to be exclusive and divisive. They can only with difficulty form the basis of a differentiated society. On the contrary, multi-national states have great trouble surviving in the modern world. Nationalism tends to lead to single homogeneous states. Where nationalism is strong, it tends to provide the common focus of identity and to fend off fragmentation. But then it is in danger of suppressing dissent and diversity and falling over into a narrow and irrational chauvinism.

Hegel gave, as we shall see again below, little importance to nationalism. And this was the cause of his failure to foresee its pivotal role in the modern world. As an allegiance it was not rational enough, too close to pure sentiment, to have an important place in the foundations of the state. But it is also true that it cannot provide what modern society needs in his view. And this is a ground for differentiation, meaningful to the people concerned, but which at the same time does not set the partial communities against each other, but rather knits them together in a larger whole.

This in a single formula is what modern society would require to resolve its dilemma. It is something which traditional societies had. For the point about conceptions of cosmic order or organic analogies is that they gave a meaning to differences between social groups which also bound them into one. But how to recover this in modern society? Hegel’s answer, as we saw it, is to give social and political differentiation a meaning by seeing them as expressive of cosmic order, but he conceives this order as the final and complete fulfilment of the modern aspiration to autonomy. It is an order founded on reason alone, and hence is the ultimate object of the free will.

We can see now more clearly how the two levels of Hegel’s thought on the necessary differentiation of society meshed with each other. On one level, there is the set of considerations drawn from a comparison with the Greek polis: the size of the modern state, the great differences which a state must encompass once all the functions are to be performed by citizens, the modern notion of individuality. These will be generally accepted by everyone though their significance might be disputed. On the other level, there is the necessary articulation of the Idea which has to be reflected in society. In Hegel’s mind these do not operate as quite separate orders of consideration, as I have set them out here. They are intricated in each other, so that Hegel sees the existing social differentiations of his time as reflecting the articulations of the Idea, or rather as preparing a perfectly adequate reflection as the Idea realizes itself in history. And that is of course why he did not see these differences as remnants of earlier history destined to wither away, as the radical thinkers of this time thought, but rather as approaching the lineaments of a state which would finally be ‘adequate to the concept’.

We cannot accept Hegel’s solution today. But the dilemma it was meant to solve remains. It was the dilemma which de Tocqueville tried to grapple with in different terms, when he saw the immense importance to a democratic polity of vigorous constituent communities in a decentralized structure of power, while at the same time the pull of equality tended to take modern society towards uniformity, and perhaps also submission under an omnipotent government. This convergence is perhaps not all that surprising in two thinkers who were both deeply influenced by Montesquieu, and both had a deep and sympathetic understanding of the past as well as of the wave of the future. But whether we take it in Hegel’s reading or in de Tocqueville’s, one of the great needs of the modern democratic polity is to recover a sense of significant differentiation, so that its partial communities, be they geographical, or cultural, or occupational, can become again important centres of concern and activity for their members in a way which connects them to the whole.

4
Returning now to Hegel’s reading of the French Revolution, we can see how the drive to absolute freedom had to fail. Being hostile to any articulation, it was incapable of rebuilding a new society on the ruins of the old through which men could once more be linked with the universal. It could come

to no positive realization [Werk], to no universal achievements [Werken] either in the domain of speech or in reality, neither to laws or universal institutions of conscious freedom, nor to deeds and achievements [Werken] of practical [wollenden] freedom.

(PhG, 417)

But then its entire energy has to be spent negatively. Faced with the existing society, the ancien regime, the aspiration to absolute freedom was driven to destroy its institutions, to level its differentiation. But since it could not produce anything in its place, absolute freedom was stuck in this negative moment, its energy could only be spent in continued destruction.

Universal freedom can produce no positive work or deed; only negative action remains to it; it is only the fury of destruction.(PhG, 418)

This is Hegel’s derivation of the Terror. The Terror was not an accidental consequence of the aspirations of the Jacobins and the other radicals of the French Revolution. The vacuity of this demand for freedom as such, what Hegel calls (in PR § 5) ‘negative freedom’ or the ‘freedom of the void’, which flies ‘from every content as from a restriction’, we have seen on a philosophical level in the emptiness of Kant’s criterion of universalization. Now it erupts onto the political scene in the fanatical refusal of any differentiated structure. The revolution may ‘imagine that it is willing some positive state of affairs, such as universal equality...’, but in fact it can realize nothing. For

such actuality leads at once to some sort of order, to a particularization of organizations and individuals alike; while it is precisely out of the annihilation of particularity and objective characterization that the self-consciousness of this negative freedom proceeds. Consequently, what negative freedom intends to will can never be anything but an abstract idea, and giving effect to this idea can only be the fury of destruction.

(PR, § 5)

But what can it destroy when the whole regime is in ruins? The answer is itself, its own children. For in fact the aspiration to total and complete participation is rigorously impossible. In fact some group has to run the show, has to be the government. This group is really a faction. But this it cannot admit, for it would undermine its legitimacy. On the contrary it claims to be the embodiment of the general will. All other factions are treated as criminal; and so they must be, since they seek to escape from and thwart the general will. They seek to separate themselves from the universal and total participation. They set themselves up as private wills, and therefore they must be crushed.

But actually participating in a faction is not necessary. Since the basic concept of legitimacy is the general will, even those whose wills are hostile and refractory, whether or not they act to oppose the revolutionary government, are enemies of freedom and of the people. In times of stress and crisis, these too must be dealt with. But of course contrary, ill will cannot be proved in the same way as counter-revolutionary activity. If we wish to strike at all the enemies of the will as well as those of the deed, then we have to go on the basis of reasonable suspicion by patriots.

Being under suspicion thus comes to take the place of being guilty, or has the same meaning and consequences.

(PhG, 419)

Hegel thus derives the revolutionary loi des suspects of the height of the Terror; and at the same time he states the basis of future terrors for whom refractory intention has been made equivalent to criminal action (‘objectively’ although not ‘subjectively’).

The Terror also has a characteristic attitude towards its enemies and their liquidation. The essence of humanity is to be found in the general will; man’s real self is there, the content of his freedom. What opposes the general will can only be the irrational, whatever there is in man of deformed misanthropy or perverse caprice. In doing away with such enemies one is not killing really autonomous men, whose opposition is rooted in their own independent identity, but empty, refractory, punctual selves which have no more human content. Their death is therefore

a death which has no inner scope and represents no fulfilment, for what is negated is a point void of content, that of the absolutely free self; it is thus the coldest, flattest death, with no more significance than cutting through a cabbage head or throwing back a draught of water.(PhG, 418–9)

In these prophetic passages, Hegel delineates the modern phenomenon of the political terror, which we have become even more sickeningly familiar with than the men of his time: a terror which sweeps aside ‘enemies of the people’ in the name of a real will which is definitive of humanity; a terror which thus escalates beyond active opponents to engulf suspects. This by itself is not new. The court of any tyrant has always known the execution of people on suspicion. But in the modern political terror the suspicion is no longer based on any calculus of likelihood of hostile action. It escalates beyond this to punish the refractory or simply the lukewarm will for itself, because this is the essence of the crime against humanity, not to belong to its forward march. And with this the victims are read out of the ranks of humanity, so that they can be treated like vermin. So that highly civilized nations outdid the worst barbarisms of Genghis Khan and Attila. And the perversion of this ideology of the collective will through its mixture with racism surpassed all previous human criminality.

In Hegel’s view, terror, or at least destructive fury, is endemic to the drive for absolute freedom itself. It cannot brook any standing structures, even its own past creations, which are not an emanation of contemporary active will. Consequently, it feels true to itself only in the work of demolition. ‘Only in destroying something does this negative will possess the feeling of itself as existent’ (PR, § 5). We can readily imagine what Hegel would have thought of Mao’s Cultural Revolution, and in general of the contemporary revolutionary’s fear of bureaucratization. What Hegel did not foresee was how positive goals and structures can be imposed in the name of absolute freedom, and how very much more terrible that can be.

Hegel’s analysis of the French Revolution sees it therefore as the final culmination of the Enlightenment, the climax of its inner contradiction. The Enlightenment is the apex of the movement of spiritualization of man in modern times. It is conscious of the fact that man is the bearer of rational will, and that nothing can stand in the way of rational will. It has disengaged itself from all the ‘positive’, from the acceptance of any simply existing institution and the irrational authority of the past. But blinded by the narrow focus of ‘understanding’ it cannot see that man is the vehicle of a greater subject. It defines man alone as the source of rational will. And as a result it can find no content for this will. It can only destroy. It ends up therefore destroying itself and its own children.

What happens then is that the state goes back to a rediscovered differentiation. But this is not just going back to square one. For something has been gained. There has been a sweeping away of the old positive structures, the irrational past, or rather one might say the past institutions which were only an imperfect embodiment of rationality. The institutions of the ancien regime had to go under, to make room for the new revivified structures which will replace them.

Thus the state which has truly incorporated the world-historical shift represented by the French Revolution is a restored differentiated state. It has some continuity as we shall see with the structure of estates which preceded it, but it is restructured and above all founded on reason. This is the state structure which Hegel delineates for us in PR.

But before we go on to look at this we should remark that this state’s arrival on the scene of history, its realization, matches its nature. Just as it is not seen as an emanation of human will simpliciter, so it is not brought about by conscious human planning. True it comes about by men’s actions in history; but what is going on here is always more than the men themselves expect. The French Revolutionaries left their skin in an attempt to do the impossible; yet they played their part in clearing the ground for the new state. Napoleon was driven to conquer Europe, to seize power for himself, and what resulted from this was the restored state. Even the disastrous consequences played their part, since the Terror had the effect Hegel attributes to any close brush with death. It brought men back to the universal, and hence facilitated the founding of the new state (PhG, 420). This is the cunning of reason.

Here we come to a crucial difference between Hegel and Marx. In Hegel’s critique of absolute freedom, we see him squaring accounts with Rousseau and the French Revolution. But this was also a critique by anticipation of Marx.10 For Marx also believes that in the end we come to a society of universal and total participation, that we win through by overcoming the division of labour to a new homogeneity. And Marx’s refusal of Hegel’s differentiation was based on precisely the issue which, as we saw, ultimately divided Hegel from the Revolutionaries: the freedom of the end of history is for Marx a purely human freedom, not the fulfilment of Geist. Consequently its realization is a conscious act.

Hence while Marx takes up Hegel’s concept of the cunning of reason, this fails to apply to the last great revolution. In Marxist thought, the bourgeois, and earlier political actors cannot understand the significance of their acts; they do more and other than they think. But this is not true of the proletariat. These have in Marxism a scientific view of things. In this case the significance of their innovative action is understood by the actors.

In Marx the equivalent thesis to the cunning of reason is based on the notion of a species nature of man. What gives the hidden significance to men’s actions in history is the as yet unknown nature of man. But with the breaching of the last contradiction, this comes to consciousness. Men see what they are, and since the agent is generic man, those who are capable of acting at the level of humanity as a whole, that is, the proletariat, can see clearly what they are doing. To put it another way, the unseen agent in history, what corresponds to Hegel’s ‘reason’ is generic man. As long as generic man is in contradiction to his actual historical embodiment, in class society, then man cannot be clear what he is doing. But once this contradiction is overcome, as it is with the proletariat, his action is self-conscious.

For Hegel, on the other hand, man is never clear what he is doing at the time; for the agency is not simply man. We are all caught up as agents in a drama we do not really understand. Only when we have played it out do we understand what has been afoot all the time. The owl of Minerva flies at the coming of the dusk.

In an important way therefore the agency is not fully ours. We did not design and plan the rational state and will it into existence. It grew through history. It grew in the institutions which came out of the German forests and developed through the middle ages, the institutions of kingship and estates which become constitutional monarchy. These institutions needed to be altered, purified, rationalized. Even this was not done to plan, but rather arose through the cunning of reason out of the activities of revolutionaries and a great conquering general who had other goals.

If for Hegel’s political theory the state must be made in conformity with reason, it follows from his philosophy of history according to which reason, i.e. Spirit, realizes itself, that this does not come about by some men seeing the blueprint of reason and building a state on the basis of it. That Reason realizes itself means that the outcome arises out of human action which is not really conscious of what it is doing, which acts while seeing through a glass very darkly, but which is guided by the cunning of reason.

Moreover, even if by some strange time-warp men could have got the correct formula of the state ahead of time, it still could not just have been applied. For an integral part of this formula is that men identify themselves with the realized public life. But this cannot simply be turned on at will, it is something which develops over time in the depths of our unconscious spiritual life. That is why Hegel says, one cannot just implant a good constitution anywhere – as Napoleon discovered in Spain. The Sittlichkeit of the Spanish people was uncombinable with that kind of Liberalism.11

And similarly, the Sittlichkeit of the right constitution grows slowly, and grows only in certain people and at a certain pace and in certain conditions. It is not just an unfortunate accident that the understanding of it does not come until it is there. Rather the understanding does not come because before it is there men are not yet grown up to this Sittlichkeit, and it is small wonder that they cannot conceive it. They have their own Sittlichkeit, but this has not yet attained the fulness of rationality. Its growth is not understood, because it involves a growth of reason, a growth in reason, and the higher stages of such a growth cannot be understood from the vantage point of the lower. The growth has to have taken place before we can understand it.

As a culmination of the growth of reason, the rational state cannot be fully understood before it is on the scene. And if one could have flashed it back to some men, they would have been powerless to effect it, for it could not have been understood, much less identified with by their contemporaries.

The idea of just designing a constitution and then putting it into practice is an Enlightenment idea. It treats the whole affair as an engineering problem, an external matter of means and design. But a constitution requires certain conditions in men’s identity, how they understand self; and hence this Enlightenment idea is radically shallow. To try in philosophy to transcend one’s age is like trying to jump over Rhodes. (Preface to PR, p. 11.)

5
Hegel’s conception of the French Revolution has afforded us an opportunity of seeing how his philosophy of history interwove with his reading of the events of his day. And from this perspective we can see where he situated himself in the political disputes of his period. The Preface we have just quoted from is a good place to find this curtly expressed; because he uses it as an opportunity to lash out at his bêtes noires while deploying some of his philosophy of history.

Thus we have seen that Hegel cannot accept the vision of those Aufklärer who would design a rational state and they try to put it into operation like an engineering plan, be this a state on utilitarian principles or one founded on the general will. But in his preface he also lashes the main opponents of these rational planners, the Romantics, writers like Jacobi, Fries, Schlegel (though only Fries is mentioned by name),12 who put little faith in reason to lead men to a higher political life. The Romantics rather put faith in sentiment, in the spontaneous love of good and of fellow, something which could not be grasped or planned by reason.

Hegel is totally opposed to this line of thought and treats it to his battery of heavy irony. For politics must be founded on reason, even if not the shallow notion of reason of the revolutionaries. The Romantic school earn his hostility not only because they depreciate reason, but because the recourse to sentiment makes law of secondary importance. And these two errors are at base the same.

Right and ethics, and the actual world of justice and ethical life, are understood through thoughts; through thoughts they are invested with a rational form, i.e., with universality and determinacy. This form is law [Gesetz]; and this it is which the feeling that stipulates for its own whim, the conscience that places right in subjective conviction [i.e., Romantic conscience], has reason to regard as its chief foe.(PR, 7)

The purely subjective romantic conscience cannot be a guide. To rely on it is to desert thought and reason, and to fall into the purely arbitrary, the whimsical, This cannot be a foundation for political life.

A third, related fault of Romanticism is that it sees present reality as disorder, as God-forsaken. Romantic thought looks backward in nostalgia to ages of integration, or at least beyond the present dead, meaningless social world within which man cannot feel at home to an ideal of social brotherhood. But the point is not just that the state is founded on reason ideally, but that this reason is actualizing itself in history. So that reason underlies the world not only ideally, but must be found in the existing world.

Hegel launches here the much-quoted slogan ‘what is rational is actual and what is actual is rational’ (PR, 10) by which he expresses the ground principle of his philosophy of history. History is the self-realization of reason. It is a realization which goes through a number of stages, the less perfect to the more perfect. This means, of course, that at earlier stages reason will be imperfectly realized; in this sense the real will also be irrational, or not fully rational. But since these stages themselves follow necessity, since they are dictated by reason, we can say that the stage of relative imperfection that reason has reached at any given time is itself according to reason. The degree of reason’s actualization in history at any given point is dictated by reason.

In short what is at work in history is reason. And therefore the real (wirklich) understood on the deepest level where we see the forces which bring it into being and shape it, this real is rational. On a more superficial level, where we concentrate on contingent variations it is not and is not meant to be. But these are not part of what Hegel calls ‘Wirklichkeit’.13 The wirklich is reality understood in relation to its underlying necessity. This is rational, because rationality is what posits the real.

Hence those who see the world as God-forsaken are blind. The job of philosophy is to uncover this rationality. But this brings us back to the objection above against rationalist reformers: we uncover the rationality not to plan the world, to remake it according to reason. To uncover reason is to uncover the force, the plan, already at work. We cannot plan because we cannot anticipate the realization of this reason in philosophy: ‘philosophy.. .always comes on the scene too late to give.. .instruction as to what the world ought to be’ (PR, 12). ‘The owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with the falling of the dusk’ (PR, 13). We have seen the reason for this above.

Thus ‘to comprehend what is, this is the task of philosophy, because what is, is reason’ (PR, 11).The aim of his book, Hegel says, is ‘to apprehend and portray the state as something inherendy rational’ (PR, 1 l).But this not only breaks with the Romantic critics of the ‘Left’, and those who yearned for another society. It also involves a vigorous rejection of legitimist thought which based the right of monarchical power to rule on the pure right of possession, or on ‘natural’ grounds which could not be derived from reason. The most influential thinker of this sort in Berlin in the early 1820s was von Haller; and Hegel lights out after him, not indeed in this preface, but in the explication to § 258 of PR. This form of thought is tarred with the same brush as Romantic rejection of the existing order; both cannot penetrate to the rational order of things.14

It should be obvious from this, that for all his critique of the French Revolution, Hegel is poles apart from Burke. True they agree that the Revolution was bent on a destructive course, and that from this nothing positive could be built. But the moral drawn by Burke was that men should remain within the spirit of their ‘positive’ institutions, there is no higher rationality by which these can be judged. While for Hegel the aim of philosophy is to discover the universal rationality in these institutions. But this rationality is developing, it is changing and transforming the positive institutions as it realizes itself in history. This is not something which is planned by man, but it is by Reason. And this plan may make use of, may have to make use of a Revolution.

In other words for Burke, men do plan change, do reform. But they should respect certain limits in this, the limits of their own institutional tradition, for otherwise they return to barbarism and destruction. Revolution of the French type is thus always destructive, it always sets one back. Hegel on the other hand insists how little men can plan, can consciously organize reform. He probably in the end is much more bearish about this than Burke. But against this, he does see a universal reason at work in history; and this reason may have to make use of revolution. For it uses men who do not fully understand its purposes. Thus the progress of reason may require a revolution, even though this is only clear afterwards, and what is gained is not what the revolutionaries aimed at. Revolution is thus not necessarily destructive, or a setback.

The French Revolution was certainly not a set-back in Hegel’s eyes. It was a world-historical event which inaugurated the completion of the modern state.

Late in life he could speak of it in these terms:

As long as the sun has stood in the heavens and the planets have circled around it, we have never yet witnessed man placing himself on his head, that is, on thought, and building reality according to it. Anaxogoras had said first that nous rules the world; but now man has come for the first time to recognize that thought should rule spiritual reality. This was a magnificent dawn. All thinking beings joined in celebrating this epoch. A sublime feeling ruled that time, an enthusiasm of the spirit thrilled through the world, as if we had now finally come to the real reconciliation of the divine with the world.

(GW, 926)

Not quite ‘Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive’, but hardly a statement that Burke could endorse. The two positions in spite of superficial similarities are really incommensurable.

It should be clear from this how little it really tells us about Hegel to class him as a conservative. First, the idea of seeing the rational in the actual is not necessarily conservative. Particularly when this rationality is an active one which is transforming the real. Thus the Hegelian notion of history as the realization of reason was easily transposable by Marx into a revolutionary theory, where the essentially rational is the revolutionary force which is transforming present reality, the proletariat.

Hegel was not a revolutionary. But the thesis that the rational became real made it impossible for him to accept the standard conservative position of that time or of any other, which cleaves to the ancient, the traditional, the long-established. Hegel constantly combatted this position, whether it came from the historical school of law, with its opposition to rational codification, or philosophers of the Restoration, who based the right to rule on prescription or the will of God (e.g., von Haller, attacked in PR, § 258), or the traditionalists of Württemberg who wanted to restore the pre-Revolutionary constitution intact.15 His opposition to what was merely ‘positive’, just given and not deduced from rational will, remains constant from his earliest writings to the end, even though his notion of what it is to be deduced from rational will changes profoundly. This is why he continued to think of the French Revolution as the great crucible out of which alone the rational state could emerge. It posited the principle of reason:

thought, the concept of right, now asserted its power all at once, and against this the old frame of injustice could offer no resistance.(GW, 926)

What is conservative, or at least non-revolutionary, in Hegel has its source in the thesis that the rationality of the real is not that of man, but of Geist. This is what makes him oppose the unchecked supremacy of the principles of the Enlightenment and the Revolution, which would lead to a society of atomic individuals or a totally homogeneous general will state. This underlies the articulations of the rational society which we saw in the last section and will examine further in the next chapter.

And this view of cosmic spirit as the subject of history rules out the possibility of a revolutionary praxis founded on reason. Revolutions are only understood and justified by reason ex post facto. What human reason can do is only to grasp what has already been realized, to understand what reason has already achieved. In doing this, of course, philosophy defends the rationality of the real and purifies it, keeping it from the corruption which would beset it if it were to be generally misunderstood by the various merchants of irrationality, both Romantics and reactionaries. For a given level of realization of rationality in the state requires a given level of subjective understanding of rationality in the citizens. Hence Hegel takes his task in the PR to be expounding and making clear the rationality inherent in the state. He has to defend this vision against those who would muddy the waters, by turning men’s gaze into the impossible beyond, or make men prize the actual for infra-rational reasons, and hence deform it.

But should an actual breach in existing reality, a revolutionary transformation, be necessary for reason, and thus on the cards, philosophy could not know. It would go on expounding the rational in the current system, while revolutionaries without benefit of sound thought would launch themselves into action. Later a higher synthesis would show how both understandings were partial.

But this is obviously deeply unsatisfactory to the revolutionary. He must believe that he has grasped the nature of reality, that he sees the truth which is inaccessible to his opponent who justifies what is; not simply that they both have partial visions which some future Hegel will show to be strands in the great tapestry of Reason. This is why the young Hegelians and particularly Marx saw the rejection of Hegel’s Geist as the essential step from his philosophy to theirs. The anthropologizing of Hegel does away with the cosmic subject of history, with the reason whose cunning is always beyond men’s understanding at the time. By making man the subject of history it allows for a time when the transformations he is bringing about are finally fully understood by him. This is the epoch of the proletarian revolution.

But Hegel’s philosophy of history is as it were a defense of the Revolution after the event. Hegel sets his face firmly against any further revolutionary transformations. Not that there are no further transformations to be made. For the fully rational state has yet to be completed. The theory that Hegel was an apologist for the existing Prussian state is a result of lamentable historical ignorance. It overlooks how many features of Hegel’s rational state were yet to be realized in the Prussia of his day, as we shall see more clearly in the next chapter. The Spirit still has work to do. But revolution is most emphatically not the way to do it.

This ‘conservatism’ of the mature Hegel is sometimes attributed to his desire to preserve his position in the Prussian state university. But this is really quite implausible. The whole of Hegel’s experience of revolution, and his judgements on the French Revolution indicate that his opposition to revolutionary methods springs from his central philosophical position and his judgement of the age. Nor is this opposition only an attitude of the later Hegel. It is continuous throughout his adult life.

What can be said of the mature Hegel, however, is that his rejection of further revolutionary change is not based just on his repugnance at the Terror, or just on the impossibility of a clairvoyant revolutionary action, but he rejected it mainly because he believed that history had come to some kind of plateau, on which the need for revolution was past. For the bases of the rational state were at last laid.

And indeed, something of the kind is implicit in the claim to have understood the rationality of history. For if this were not the case, if reason required some further revolutionary transformation of society, this could of course not be understood by those living now; and the higher synthesis which would come out of such a revolution would similarly not be understood. The claim to have grasped the rationality in history and politics thus carries with it the presumption that the major transformations are behind us. For if the owl of Minerva only flies at the coming of the dusk, then history can only be understood when its major transformations have been realized.16

This does not mean that the rational state is fully realized, as I pointed out above, or that history has reached an end. On the contrary, there is a great deal of further development required of the principle of rationality which was far from being embodied in all its ramifications. Indeed, it seems most likely that Hegel thought that it would never be embodied in an absolutely perfect exemplar. And even if those West European states which came closest to the Idea were perfect, history has a great deal yet to do in bringing other parts of the world up to scratch. (Hegel makes occasional, brief references to the future of Russia and America.)17

But what remains to be done amounts to the working out of principles which are already come into their own. The new world has made that ‘qualitative leap’ into existence, of which the preface to PhG spoke (PhG, 15). But just as a new building is not ready when its foundations are laid, so a great deal remains to be done when the new world first establishes its general foundations (allgemeiner Grund, PhG, 16). This further work is of the utmost importance, but it neither admits of nor would be advanced by revolution.

What is this plateau which we have reached? We shall now see in a little more detail as we turn to examine the system of the PR. But in its broad lines it should be evident from the philosophy of history which we have been examining. It will be a state which somehow combines the universal subjectivity of Socrates and Christ with the Sittlichkeit of the ancients. It will be a state whose Sittlichkeit is such that universal individuals can identify with it.

The principle of modern states has prodigious strength and depth because it allows the principle of subjectivity to progress to its culmination in the extreme of self-subsistent personal particularity, and yet at the same time brings it back to the substantive unity and so maintains this unity in the principle of subjectivity itself.(PR, § 260)

It will have achieved this because both sides will have moved to meet each other. The universal subjectivity will have come to see that it must find embodiment in a state; and will also have taken the further step of realizing that this cannot be a state founded simply on human will, but rather on man’s will as an emanation of Geist. Hence that the individual must take his place in a wider order, with which he nevertheless identifies because it is the embodiment of reason.

The universal subjectivity will thus have understood that he cannot simply create the rational society, that he must also find it there as an order which unfolds in history. And when he does this he can step beyond individualism and once more return to the ‘ethical conviction’ (sittliche Gesinnung), the inner sense of being one with a realized order, where the highest form of freedom is found.

But at the same time the order itself had to evolve. It had to become in conformity with reason, so that the universal subject can be at home (bei sich), and identify with it as his Sittlichkeit.

This evolution, thinks Hegel, has now taken place. The strivings of reason to remake the world in conformity with reason have been ship-wrecked. But in the process they brought about a rationalization of the state which their authors did not yet properly conceive. They swept away the old positive, so that the state which arose after the cataclysm was not simply in continuity with the past but purified. Rational men, after developing their subjectivity to the full, are now ready to identify with this new state. The task of philosophy is to further this identification by laying bare the rational foundation of the real, and through this identification the rational state will come to completion. Let us now see this vision of the rational state as Hegel sets it out in PR.

 

 

1 ‘Völker, die sich vernünftig in sich organisiert haben, sind es, die wir betrachten. In der Weltgeschichte kann nur von Völkern die Rede sein, welche einen Staat bilden. Man darf sich eben nicht einbilden, daß auf einer wüsten Insel, überhaupt in Abgeschiedenheit solches hervorgehen könne.’ (VG, 113.)

2 Let me repeat that this notion of Volksgeist does not involve some special doctrine about a supra-individual subject of society. Volksgeister are historical cultures, but seen as embodiments of Geist, at a certain stage of its realization and self-knowledge. The basic difficulty, if there is one, concerns the relation of man to this cosmic subject of which they are the vehicles. There is no special problem about the historical configurations men adopt in order to embody Spirit.

3 Cf. above Chapter VIII.

4 Cf. passage in the Logic, in the section on Inner Teleology, WL, II, 397–8.

5 Avineri, cf. Hegels theory of the Modern State, p. 233, finds that Hegel contradicts himself in his doctrine of the world-historical individual, since he seems to hold sometimes that he is fully conscious of the idea he is realizing, at other times only instinctively conscious, and in still other passages he is said not to be conscious at all. Avineri’s quotes are from Reason in History, and it seems to me that with a little allowance for the unpolished nature of this text which Hegel never prepared for publication, the texts can fairly easily be reconciled around the notion that world-historical individuals have a sense of the higher truth they serve, but they see it through a glass darkly.

6 This is, of course, the background to the famous passage in which Hegel resumes the history of freedom (VG, 62): The oriental world knew only that one man was free – the king represented the absolute principle, e.g., the Persian despot (but of course in an important sense not even he was free, as a really rational subjectivity). The Greek world won through to an intuition of freedom, but saw only that some were free. Only with Christianity do we win through to the intuition that man as such is free.

7 This is also the line of Chapter V, Vernunft, of the PhG.

8 ‘die Welt ist [dem Selbstbewußtsein] schlechthin sein Wille, und dieser ist allgemainer Wille. Und zwar ist er nicht der leere Gedanke des Willens, der in stillschweigende oder repräsentierte Einwilligung gesetzt wird, sondern reell allgemeiner Wille, Wille aller Einzelnen als solcher.’ (PhG, 415).

9 Cf. PhG and PR, § 207.

10 Though Marx who has his own variant of the Hegelian principle of embodiment and sees man set in the matrix of nature in part escapes this criticism. See discussion below,Chapter XX, section 2.

11 PR, §274, Addition.

12 Hegel has been strongly critidzed for this attack on Fries. Fries was a professor who sympathized with the Burschenschaften, student fraternities dedicated to carrying on the spirit of the patriotic war against France, and bringing about a united Germany. Their Romantic nationalism was very much out of favour with the restored German state governments in the post-1815 period. Fries attended the Wartburg festival of the Burschenschaften in 1817 and gave a speech full of Romantic enthusiasm for the cause of a revivified Germany. For this he was later suspended. The Burschenschaften were subsequently suppressed by general agreement of the state governments.

Hegel’s acton in attacking Fries at this point has been called ignoble. It seems like kicking a man when he’s down, and moreover a man of the Liberal left. This seems to put the seal on Hegel’s reputation as a conservative defender of the status quo, and a somewhat nasty one at that.

But this is not the only way we can look at it. The young men of the Burschenschaftenwere not just Romantic nationalists. There was a great deal of chauvinism and anti-Semitism in their rhetoric. The Wartburg festival featured a great book-burning of authors they opposed. One of their members murdered the poet Kotzebue on suspicion of being a Russian agent.

Then as now there were intellectuals who publicly condoned this kind of action, or ambiguously praised the pure intentions of the youth while avoiding endorsement of his action. In an age in which once more young people are egged on by their elders to a violence justified only by its exalted motivation, we cannot be so sure as we used to be that Hegel was sinning against liberalism, or against his duty as an intellectual, in denouncing this kind of frothy ethical subjectivism, and especially in tackling its most notorious exponent. Cf. the discussion in W. Kaufmann (Ed.), Hegel’s Political Philosophy, between Sidney Hook and Schlomo Avineri. See also S. Avineri, Hegel’s Theory of the Modern State, CUP, 1972, pp. 119–21.

13 Cf. Hegel’s comment, added in a later edition of the Encyclopaedia, on this slogan from PR (EL, § 6). Cf. also the Wirklichkeit category of the Logic, and the accompanying notion of superficial contingency, above Chapter XI.

14 Cf. Fr. Rosenzweig, Hegel und der Staat, München 1920, II, 190.

15 Cf. his essay of 1815–16, The Württemberg Estates, in Hegel’s Political Writings, Ed. Z. Pelczynski, Oxford, 1964.

16 It has been argued (E. Weil: Hegel et LEtat, Paris, 1950) that Hegel’s theory itself points to further transformations, to cope with the contradictions of civil society, and to bring a world state out of the existing sovereign states whose relations with each other are not sittlich. But I do not think this can be sustained in detail (cf. Franz Grégoire, Etudes Hégéliennes, Louvain 1958, rv); and above all, I do not think that the idea of such a further transformation can consort with the claim to have grasped the rationality in that state, not in some clouded form as ‘representation’ (Vorstellung) and religious thought achieves, but in the full clarity of philosophical thought. How could the full rationality of the state be evident, if it was meant to be superceded in reason’s plan by a world-state?

17 Cf. Philosophy of History, translated by J. Sibtree, Dover Edition, New York, 1956, pp. 82–7, 350.

 
    