## CHAPTER II
## Hegel’s Itinerary
 

 

1
Hegel as a young man in the 1780s, first at the Stuttgart Gymnasium then at the Tübinger Stift, was deeply moved by the expressivist current of his time. The image of a whole, integrated life in which man was at one with himself, and men were at one with each other in society, also assumed its paradigmatic form for him in the classical past of Greece.

But there were two other important poles of his thought and aspiration which were already evident at that time and remained vital to him through many transformations: the first was the moral aspiration of the Enlightenment, that man should at last come to the freedom of self-direction through reason. Later he will come to think of Kant as the paradigm proponent of this aspiration, but at the beginning Mendelssohn and Lessing were more important for him. The second major reference point was the Christian religion. That theology was one of his preoccupations might be thought to flow normally from the fact that he received his higher education in a theology seminary. But his interest in Christianity was much deeper. Indeed, the theology he was taught at Tübingen aroused his opposition. It is one of the negative poles against which he defines his position in the early writings. And the fact that his conception of the Christian religion underwent profound changes and yet remained central to his basic views right through to the mature system shows that this orientation was not the result of a passing influence.

These three reference points were potentially in deep conflict and Hegel’s mature thought is a heroic attempt to reconcile them. But in his early, Tübingen days he felt that the three corresponding aspirations thrust in the same direction. The age was seen by Hegel and many of his generation as one of division and repression of spontaneity. They longed to restore it to the wholeness of expressive unity, so that men’s moral activity and social life would spring out of a living experience of unity and the good, rather than be ruled by dead formulae.

But this expressive aspiration seemed to them at base no different from the demands of Aufklärung, that man live by his own reason instead of external, irrational authority based on the prestige of the past. In both cases, it was a matter of restoring man’s autonomy against external authority, something living and felt by the self against something external and an object of mere understanding. And in both cases the revolution affected both the life of the individual (who recovered autonomy and wholeness) and the relations between persons in society (relations of domination give way to spontaneous, equal association).

Thus Hegel and the young radicals at Tübingen did not see their longing to restore the Greek ideal as in any way conflicting with their allegiance to the Enlightenment. Pericles, Socrates, Lessing and Kant were thought to stand at base for the same ideals. But these could not but be seen as in conflict with the established Christian religion of their day, grounding its claims on supernatural authority, supporting hierarchies of command, both spiritual and temporal, and preaching a radical division in man between sinful nature and the spirit.

Because of this some of the young radicals of Hegel’s day moved to a position of global opposition to Christian faith. This was the case, for instance, of the young Schelling, although he changed his mind later on. But Hegel, and also Hölderlin, however critical they were of established Christianity and even at times of Christ himself, never broke away.

What seemed to them not only compatible but fundamentally identical with the demands of expressive unity and Reason was (what they saw as) the original teachings of Jesus, the teacher who taught that the letter killeth while the spirit giveth life, who came to fulfil the law through the spontaneity of agape.

Hegel’s period at Tübingen was from 1788 to 1793 – obviously a pivotal one for young Germans. The growth of Enlightenment, the recent recovery of sympathy with the ideals of Greece, the cultural ferment following the Sturm und Drang were now capped by the epoch-making events in Paris. It is not surprising that in young minds the spark of hope be kindled that they might see, even bring about a transformation of Germany, a new edition of the Great Age of Athens. The young radicals at Tübingen with whom Hegel associated reflected in their language about themselves and their ideals all three of these reference points. ‘Hen kai pan’ (‘one and all’), one of Hölderlin’s great watchwords, expressed the great current of life flowing through all beings with whom men must be reunited. The vision of hen kai pan – a term given currency by Lessing’s use of it – was grounded on the expressivist reading of Spinozism referred to in an earlier section. ‘Reason and Freedom’ was a slogan which needs no comment in the context of the time. But this same group of hellenophile Aufklärer referred to themselves as the ‘invisible church’ and spoke of their goal as the ‘Kingdom of God’, not more than half in irony.1

Thus in the mind of the young Hegel Germany stood in need of regeneration, which would at the same time be a triumph of the Enlightenment’s autonomous reason, a recreation of what was best in the Greek spirit, and a recovery of the pure teaching of Jesus. Hegel’s earliest unpublished writing can be seen as studies motivated by this triple aspiration. And his development through the 1790s up to the early 1800s when his system assumes something like its final form can be seen in part as the response to two pressures: first the external fact of failure, that the hoped-for regeneration did not come; and second the inner tension between the three poles of reference which force a redefinition of all of them and of their mode of relation.

A very early manuscript from his Tübingen period2 shows how Hegel’s vision of regeneration was not that of the secular revolutionaries who were then transforming French society, but involves at its most fundamental level a renewal of religious life. But Hegel’s religion is far from that of traditional piety. At this stage it is largely a religion of Aufklärer in terms defined by Kant.

After the Kantian fashion religion is seen in the perspective of morality, rather than vice versa. What I ought to do I determine not by my religious faith or the commands of God but by the commands I give myself as a rational being. Indeed, the rational core of religion, the belief in God and immortality, is founded on the requirements of morality, as necessary postulates if the highest good is to be realized. Hegel’s early essays resonate with the sense, which we saw in Kant, that man comes closest to the holy when he acts as the subject of a pure moral will.

But religion in the full sense – and not just the holding of the above ‘rational’ beliefs-is none the less indispensable to man. Man is not just a rational but also a sensible creature. Although we may put as our highest ideal that of man acting in pure respect for the moral law – Hegel does not yet challenge this anchor point of Kantian ethics – this is very far from where men are. In fact men are effectively moved to good by the heart, by a brace of inclinations, interwoven with sensibility, which constitute the different forms of benevolence: love, friendship, compassion (Nohl, 18). In this Hegel is closer to Rousseau.

Now religion, not as nominal belief in a number of propositions about the supernatural, or in the carrying out of external practices, but as living piety, is the great source of motivation towards good for the whole man. Hence Hegel begins this fragment with a distinction between objective and subjective religion. The former is just the theology and the practices seen externally. The latter is the living experience of man of the good and of God as its author, however this expresses itself in belief and cult.3

From the very beginning, therefore, Hegel does not take up the standpoint of the austere Enlightenment about religion, that nothing can be believed but what reason licences. He does indeed condemn superstition, where men act in order to bring about a response from the supernatural, say, sacrifice in order to placate an angry God. But he is far from holding, for example, that sacrifice as such has no place in a purified religion, if it is done in a spirit of pious thankfulness, as an expression of grateful dependence on God, rather than a means of avoiding punishment (as Hegel rather unrealistically saw Greek sacrifice, Nohl, 25–6).

Another important distinction in this MS is that between private religion, which touches the life of the individual in his personal and family relations, and a ‘religion of a people’ (Volksreligion) which is woven into the public life of a society. Obviously the most important model of a Volksreligion for Hegel was provided by the public religions of ancient Greece, which were an integral part of social life, inseparable from the other aspects of the city’s common existence, and essential to its identity.

The importance of these distinctions for Hegel’s purposes can be readily grasped. The regeneration he looks for is one in which men achieve the freedom of moral self-determination, while at the same time recovering a wholeness or integrity where reason is not at odds with the passions, or spirit with sensibility, but where the whole man is moved spontaneously to moral goodness.

And this wholeness would not only heal the divisions within men but between them as well. The regeneration Hegel seeks is thus also and necessarily a political one: the recovery of a society in which men are free and undivided, as the Greeks were, in which the public life is an expression, and a common expression, of the citizens, rather than being imposed by unchallengeable authority on subjects. Hegel was thus profoundly in sympathy with the French Revolution in its early years – and in fact the ideals of 1789 remained an important part of his political thinking throughout his life.

In other words, Hegel holds to the aspiration to expressive unity; it is this, of course, rather than a simple calculation of human fallibility which makes him unable to accept fully Kant’s separation of reason and sensibility and cleave rather to Rousseau; it is this which will ultimately turn him against Kant.

Now a regeneration of this kind, which involves the whole man, can only be achieved by religion, within the terms of the problem which Hegel has established. But in order to do this, religion must be fully subjectivized: that is, it must be more than an external allegiance to certain doctrines and practices, and become living piety in order to unite man within himself: and it must be more than the religion of some individuals, it must be woven into the life of the people, and linked with reformed political institutions, if it is to unite men with each other.4 What is wanted is a subjectivized, folk religion, which is nevertheless not in contradiction to the Enlightenment, not a religion of superstition.

These are the three requirements which Hegel sets out towards the end of this early MS: the regenerate religion must be such that

 

I.        Its doctrine must be grounded on universal reason.

II.      Fancy, heart and sensibility must not thereby go empty away.

III.     It must be so constituted that all the needs of life and the public affairs of the state are tied in with it.’5

These requirements plainly express two of the poles of Hegel’s thought. The first reflects the allegiance to the Aufklärung: religion must teach nothing contrary to the rational doctrines about the supernatural: the existence of God, immortality, their relation to a good which one should seek for its own sake (not in order to placate God). The other two reflect the aspiration to expressive unity. II insists that the whole man, not just reason, but also ‘Phantasie’, the power to discern higher realities in sensible images, ‘Herz’, or moral sentiment, and Sinnlichkeit; the sensible side of human nature, should have their part, III requires that this uniting of the whole man with reason be a common, public realization, not confined to the private realm or to one side of life, but woven into the business of meeting ‘all the needs of life’ and into ‘the public actions of the polis’, III, in other words, is the demand for a Volksreligion, such as the Greeks enjoyed.

But how does this fit with the third pole of Hegel’s thought, the Christian religion? Very uneasily, in fact; and this tension will occupy Hegel throughout the 1790s. A number of other unpublished MSS deal with this and connected questions, among them an essay of the Berne period, written in 1795–6, which has been given the title, ‘The Positivity of the Christian Religion’, and the great MS from his Frankfurt period which has been called ‘The Spirit of Christianity and its Fate’, written and re-written between 1798 and 1800.

Of course, the institutional Christian religion as it has become, particularly in its Catholic variant, a religion of authority encouraging superstition, is not even a starter. But the question arises how much even original, pure Christianity can meet the three requirements. Hegel thinks that it meets the first requirement well. The picture of Jesus in the MSS of the early and middle 1790s is of a Kantian avant la lettre, but one who embodies and teaches wholeness. Against the Jewish morality of law he set a teaching founded on reason and the heart. The principle of his Gospel was the will of God but this was at the same time (zugleich) ‘his own heart’s living sense of right and duty’ (Knox 75).6

This Jesus wonderfully manages to combine the demands of Kantian ethics and the expressivist ideal. In setting the ‘living feeling of his own heart’ against a law supposedly handed down as an external command from God (or rather transposing this law into one of the heart, thus ‘fulfilling’ it) Hegel’s Jesus replaces heteronomy with autonomy. But in finding the will of God in ‘the living feeling of his own heart’, he avoids the opposition between reason and sensibility, he lives the moral life as an integral expression of his humanity. He goes beyond the law both qua command, and qua dry, abstract formula. This combination, which we have suggested the writers and thinkers of this generation were struggling to conceive, is here bought much too cheaply; Hegel will not be able to sustain it much longer, as we shall see.

In a sense, the main purpose of the ‘positivity’ essay is to explain what happened to the religion of Jesus that it degenerated into present-day Christianity. The key concept in the answer is just this one of positivity. A ‘positive’ religion is one which is grounded on authority, rather than being postulated by our own reason (and supplemented of course, by our response of feeling to what reason has postulated, e.g., the images and cult of our devotion to God). We have a positive religion when we have ‘a system of religious propositions, that is supposed to have the force of truth for us, because we are commanded to believe by an authority to which we cannot refuse to subject our faith’ (Nohl, 233). The origin of this term is plainly in the law, where ‘positive law’ is what reposes on command of authority, and is opposed to ‘natural’ law.7

Now the pathos of Christianity is just that Jesus’ teaching could not penetrate an age and people who were so imbued with legalism and oriented to command. So he was forced to rely on the Messiah myth, in terms of which as a great teacher he could not but be perceived by his followers. His response was to try to give the myth a higher sense. But the result was ultimately that men who were incapable of living the full unity of reason and Herz preached a religion of Christ, that is another positive religion in which belief in Christ, not a recovery of God’s will in one’s own heart, is the foundation; in which the good must be done because revealed in Christ, not out of respect alone for the moral law (Nohl, 212; Knox, 144).

But this story, while it exonerates the original teaching of Jesus, in fact raises deep problems for anyone who would want to see it the basis of a regenerated Volksreligion meeting the three requirements. Hegel is very aware of these. First of all, what is gained by preaching a religion of autonomy and wholeness together, when in fact men cannot attain this unity? What one gains on the swings, one loses on the roundabouts. Indeed, more than loses. For not only does the ideal of autonomous integrity once more slip away from men and become something external: a Christ to which men pray, or an after-life beyond this world. But the sense of separation and inadequacy is all the crueller in that the ideal is higher than its predecessors, not just the compliance with a law of external observances, but a purity of intention, against which men must sense uncleanness of the heart, a vice of the will.

This is the point of origin of Hegel’s reflection on the theme of the ‘unhappy Consciousness’, which reaches one of its most powerful expressions in the section of that title in the PhG. Hegel begins to measure the depth of the problem in the Berne period. Christianity is in a sense a failed religion, once we grasp what the original teaching of Jesus was. The failure can be most dramatically seen in the fact that Jesus had to die, so little was the world prepared to receive his message. Already this marks the subsequent life of Christianity with a certain melancholy, that at the centre of its worship is the Crucified One, and this starkly contrasts with Greek religion in which the divine is woven into the self-affirmation of the community.

But this melancholy can be further understood as springing from a deep division, one continuous with the division that Christianity was meant to heal, the rift between man’s spiritual vocation and his life in nature. This idea grows in Hegel’s thought with his consciousness of the depth and importance of this rift, and this cannot but go along with a re-evaluation of Kant, who in a sense made it absolute.

These themes are developed together in the manuscript written during 1799–1800, which has been called ‘The Spirit of Christianity and its Fate.’The MS opens with a study of what has become for Hegel the original paradigm of unhappy consciousness, the religion of the Jews as founded by Abraham. Abraham tore himself loose from the original unity with nature and with his tribe. Nature became for him so much neutral matter, which could not be united with spirit, but rather had to be dominated by it. One key term whereby Hegel designates this fateful turn of the human spirit is ‘separation’ (Trennung):

The first act which made Abraham the progenitor of a nation is a disseverance [Trennung] which snaps the bonds of communal life and love. The entirety of the relationships in which he had hitherto lived with men and nature, these beautiful relationships of his youth he spurned.

(Knox, 185)

The other connected term is ‘domination’ (‘Herrschaft’). The spirit that led Abraham was

The spirit of self-maintenance in strict opposition to everything – the product of his thought raised to be the unity dominant over the nature which he regarded as infinite and hostile (for the only relationship possible between hostile entities is mastery [Herrschaft] of one by the other).

(Knox, 186)

Hegel interprets the spirit of Abraham as that we have called above ‘objectification’, the ‘disenchantment’ of nature, whereby it ceased to be seen as an embodiment of a sacred or spiritual order in relation to which man must define himself, and came to be seen as raw material to be shaped by human will. Hegel sees the essential connection in this objectification between the separation from nature and our relating to it as something to be dominated. Hegel is thus projecting one of the central strands of modern consciousness back onto the father of the Jewish faith. Historically, this is hard to sustain; but if I am right in holding that Christianity and particularly its Calvinist form had an important role in the forming of the modern consciousness of objectification, Hegel’s thesis here may be insightful even if misplaced.8

In any case, Hegel was not of course holding that Abraham’s consciousness of nature was a modern objectified one. This domination of nature was not attributed to man by Abraham (as against Nimrod, the entrepreneur of the Tower of Babel, who came to a sticky end as is known), but was projected onto the pure spirit, God. Men had part in this pure unity over against nature only by cleaving to God, and to this end the chosen people had to separate themselves rigorously from others and from the Gods of nature. But to give oneself to a God of Herrschaft (domination) is to submit oneself to his will, it is to become his slaves. Hence man, who is also and inescapably part of nature, had to be on the receiving end of a relation of domination, if he was himself to rule over nature; and nature as ‘hostile’ (Feindseliges) could only be ruled over or rule herself. Man’s only choice was between two servitudes, to dead things or to the living God. Hence what God promised the children of Israel was not the expressive unity with nature the Greeks achieved, but rather that it would be at their disposal, would serve their needs, the land ‘flowing with milk and honey’.

This was the original wrench which created the ‘unhappy consciousness’ as Hegel will call it later, the consciousness of separation from nature, a consciousness in which unity and mutuality is replaced by domination and servitude, between man and nature, nature and spirit, and ultimately also as a consequence between man and man. For Hegel as one who held to the aspiration of expressive unity, this consciousness could not but be unhappy, a tearing asunder. The message of Jesus was a call to man to restore the lost unity, to replace the law which commands from outside and divides men from nature and each other with the voice of the heart, that affinity of spirit with nature which comes forward in love.

But as we saw, the message could not be heard. It could not even be integrally understood by the disciples. Hegel’s account of this failure follows a significantly different line in the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ MS than it did in the ‘Positivity’ essay. There the central idea was that Jesus was forced to assume the Messiah myth, and hence ultimately to set in train the establishing of a new positive authority. Here the central notion is that of retreat, of turning inward.

This new account is set in the context of a new critical appraisal of Kant. Hegel has finally come to see the rift between the Kantian ideal of moral autonomy and the aspiration to expressive unity. We have seen that the Jesus of the earlier MSS, for instance the ‘Positivity’ MS and that which has been called ‘The Life of Jesus’, united the two. He was a Kantian avant la lettre who also preached a wholeness of moral response, a unity of reason and heart. The conflict with Kant was implicit from the beginning in that Hegel refused to accept the separation of morality and inclination which was central to Kant’s position. But now the conflict is out in the open: the Jesus of the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ is contrasted to Kant just on this central point, that he preaches not ‘morality’ in the Kantian sense but a spontaneous unity of inclination with the good which thus transcends and ‘fulfills’ the law.9

Against the Kantian separation of duty and desire, Hegel sees Jesus’ vision as that of their union, in which the spirit of reconciliation (Versöhnlichkeit, Nohl, 269) replaces, goes beyond and hence fulfils the law with its particular, measured prescriptions. This inclination of the heart, which is no longer particular and egoistic, is life itself coming back into its rights, and as a union of opposites which really belong together it is ‘love’ (esp. 327). Love is the spirit which restores the unity of man within himself, with other men and with nature.

By contrast the Kantian morality remains one of division. Here Hegel uses a formula which becomes central to his critique of Kant later on: Kantian morality in separating the concept of the right from the reality of my inclinations, expresses simply an ‘ought’ (Sollen). But the religion of Jesus which unites the two is founded on an ‘is’ (Sein), a ‘modification of life’. (Nohl, 266; Knox, 212.)

But Hegel’s main critique of Kant is a cruel ad hominem point. The main point d’honneur of Kantian morality is that it alone safeguards autonomy and eschews any ‘positive’ morality. But Hegel argues, by dividing man and setting up one side, reason, over the other, sensibility or inclinations, Kantian morality retains an ‘indestructible residue of positivity’. So that the difference between the believers in a positive religion and the Kantian moral man is not as great as Kant claimed, rather it is simply that the former ‘have their lord outside themselves, while the latter carries his lord in himself, yet at the same time is his own slave’ (Knox, 211).10

Hegel’s claim that the moralist is ‘his own slave’ is more than just a clever ad hominem twist of the argument. It flows from his substantive position. The notion of autonomy refers us to an account of the self to whom it is attributed. The Kantian self is ultimately identified with the faculty which gives laws to ourselves, reason; man is thus free even against inclination. But Hegel holds fundamentally to the expressivist view of man: the self is the inner single source which expresses itself in the unfolding of reason and inclinations alike. Thus the imposition of an alien law on one of these sides of our being is a kind of (partial) slavery.

In a more direct way, this slam at Kant fits into the logic of his argument in this manuscript. At the outset, in his discussion of Abraham he makes the point that separation cannot but lead to relations of domination and servitude. The separation from Nature faces us with the choice of dominating or being dominated by her, and the separation of spirit from ourselves as natural beings makes us slaves of God. Similarly, the rift between reason and inclination makes us slaves of the prescriptions of reason, which in being cut off from the living sense of our situation and relations which we have through sensibility and feeling, are necessarily abstract and rigid. The Kantian moral man is the successor of Abraham who has interiorized his jealous law-giving God and called him ‘reason’.11

The spirit of the law, from Abraham to Kant, can judge man for his transgressions and mete out punishment. And the punishment meted out by the law is just, whether given by man or God, since its principle is that I forego the right I have transgressed against. But law cannot overcome transgression because to be under law is already to be guilty of the essential trespass, that against the unity of life.

Thus when we suffer punishment under law, we never put our sin behind us. For judgement by law is judgement by concept which is abstracted from life and set over against it – and which on the human social level also presupposes an institutional division between men with the power to judge and execute sentence and those which are judged. Hence even to have served our time is not to have reconciled ourselves with that against which we have trespassed, the law. Or if it is internalized, it is present in us as a bad conscience. In either case, the division remains.

Against this vision of man’s relation to God, his own conscience and society, Hegel sets an alternative one in this manuscript, whose central notion is ‘fate’. Nourished on a study of Greek drama Hegel presents a nation of fate in which what happens to us outside our power, what befalls us in history, should be seen as the reaction onto us of our own trespass against life. The trespass against life is, of course, separation, the dividing of the living whole, within man, between men, or between man and nature. The destruction of life turns it into an enemy, for ‘it is immortal and, if slain, it appears as its terrifying ghost which […] lets loose its Eumenides’ (Knox, 229). Thus for instance the fate of the Jewish people, who in separating from nature could allow only relations of domination or servitude with surrounding nature and humanity, was to suffer repeated enslavement.

If we understand our relation to God (and the company of men in history) on this model and not that of the law, then we can see how a reconciliation is possible which quite sets our transgressions behind us. Because the punishment we receive from fate is that of life injured, it offers the road to reconciliation; we can take this by recognizing that our fate is just the other side of our act; and in recognizing this we can restore the unity, cease to act in the way which divides, and therefore cease to call down a seemingly alien fate upon us. In doing this we restore the oneness of life, we overcome totally the division caused by trespass, and hence trespass and the division from fate are quite set behind us. Fate is punishment, but unlike that from law it is meted out to us by the great current of life. Hence we can be reconciled to it, can come to see it as one with us, can heal the breach altogether as life. ‘In fate […]man recognizes his own life’ (Knox, 231), and ‘Life can heal its wounds again’ (Knox, 230).

Now this conception is very much Greek inspired and not at all Christian. How does it help to understand the religion of Jesus? Because the spirit which recognizes our own life injured in our fate, the spirit which heals wounds and overcomes division, is what Hegel calls love, this is the interpretation of Christian agape in this manuscript.

Jesus’ teaching was of this love, and his life was lived in the full reconciliation with the whole that love brings. And in this way he in a sense escaped fate. That is, he did not transgress against the unity of life, and hence never encountered hostile fate. Does Jesus then provide the model for the perfect religion, a teaching which is both rational and touches the whole man, and which is now seen to be higher than Kant’s divisive reason? No, because in another sense, Jesus cannot escape fate. Fate can catch even the innocent, who is drawn into transgression against his will. Suppose I am attacked, and have to fight for my rights or let injustice be done. In either case I must transgress against the unity of life, by what I do or what I suffer.

The only way to escape this dilemma is to sacrifice my rights gladly, willingly, to withdraw from them, as it were, to be willing to forego everything in order not to be divided from others, and hence from love; to turn the other cheek to the aggressor, go twain with him who would compel me to go a mile, and thus remain ‘open to reconciliation’ with my malefactor, without the barrier of injured right between us (Knox, 236).

This was the path which Jesus took, that of withdrawal, which Hegel calls ‘beauty of soul’.12 And the withdrawal was not occasional but wholesale. For in fact Jesus’ message came in a climate which could not receive it, where the spirit of Jewish legalism reigned supreme, and where the Mosaic law penetrated every aspect of life, not only public life, but family relations as well. The fullness of life Jesus was preaching could not be lived within the bounds of this legalism, and being unable to win the Jews away from this spirit, Jesus himself was forced to forgo the normal expression of a full human life. Not only could his new religious consciousness not find expression in the public life of the Jewish people, so that Jesus had to be content with gathering a small group around him, but he even had to forgo the normal relations of marriage and family, entwined as they were with the legal spirit he wanted to transcend.

Jesus in other words was forced to a withdrawal in order to retain the purity of his message; and the logical conclusion of this withdrawal was the supreme renunciation, where he gave up his life to the hostile authorities.

In Hegel’s portrait Jesus’ withdrawal is meant to be merely strategic, not ultimate. He accepts death, he accepts not to fight by the weapons of his world in the hope that the life thus preserved pure through sacrifice, could flower in a community after. But of course the conditions which forced his withdrawal do not permit this flowering any the more after his death. The community remains a persecuted group, with no place in the public life of the nation, anxiously guarding the purity of its love.

This new account of Christianity’s failure does not replace but rather supplements the early one in terms of the creation of a new positivity. The apostles are not only incapable, even as Jesus was, of imparting the new life to their society, they cannot sustain it fully among themselves as he did. They remain dependent on him, now as the departed Christ. Jesus accepted an early death not only as a sacrifice of love which cannot itself use the weapons of division, even in self-defence, but also because he hoped that this passing would cure the dependence of his followers. But in this respect also, his hope was not fulfilled.

From this account we can derive some of the abiding characteristics of the Christian religion. First, unlike that of the Greeks, it is essentially a private religion which was renounced public expression and at its origin marked a distinction between the things of Caesar and the things of God. But second, this division of public and private is just a manifestation of a deeper rift: it springs from the deeper tendency to withdraw from all those multiple aspects of life in which the fullness of love cannot be lived integrally because they are bound up with ‘this world’, including family and property relations.

The early church tried to escape these by community of property, and Hegel implies that only lack of courage kept them from communal marriage as well. But of course, they cannot forever be escaped, and hence the Christian is doomed to an even more profound unhappy consciousness than the Jew. The Jewish spirit had made nature and the relationships of life into objectified realities. But as such, there was nothing wrong with enjoying them as the fruit of obedience to God. But Christian consciousness demanded that these relations be expressions of love, and being unable still to experience them as anything but objectified it must either renounce them in mortification, or enjoy them with a perpetual bad conscience. The rift remains, and Christian consciousness fails as much as Jewish to recover the Greek mean of beauty (Nohl, 313; Knox, 266).

This rift is what imparts the character of melancholy to Christian worship, and why it centres on a crucified God, thus turning suffering which Jesus saw as a temporary necessity on the way to the Kingdom, and which would be set aside, into something central to the community.

But of course it was already a failure of Jesus’ mission, as we saw, that the community had to depend on Christ, either crucified or risen, as an authority and a continuing source. Jesus had meant for the spirit to come to them so that they would be as he was, capable of living the reconciled life independently. This sliding back into positivity is the third important feature of ongoing Christianity.

Hegel hints at the corruption which inevitably came as the Church grew and eventually became ‘established’ in the world. The positive side of this withdrawal of the early church was that they did live an intense community life, however anxiously they had to guard it against involvement with the world. When the church grew and inevitably became involved with the world, then bad conscience increased with the resulting inevitable increase in hypocrisy. An otherworldly church assuming power in a world it could not but disvalue necessarily corrupted both. The fight of purity against impurity, when the former is already involved with the latter, is something ‘horrible’ (gräßlich, Nohl, 329). Moreover, this striving for purity, transposed into a positive religion, becomes a battle to keep belief unsullied and gives birth to all the persecutions and heresy-hunts which strew the history of the Church.

Thus Christianity does not really escape fate. Or rather there is a particular fate which awaits those who try to be above fate, try to withdraw from the divisions of the world. And this seems in some ways worse than what it replaces. Christianity seems a failure, and Hegel seems farther than ever from uniting his three poles of allegiance. Not only does the Christian religion appear uncombinable with Greek unity, but Kantian moral freedom is also at odds with both.

2
But some hints towards a new solution, an entirely new synthesis of these three elements, are already present in this manuscript on the ‘Spirit of Christianity’.

The need for an entirely new kind of synthesis grows with the insight that this separation of spirit from life is not a gratuitous falling off from the human norm. There is a certain necessity, or at least inevitability about it. Thus that Christianity as a religion of love is essentially a private religion, that it does not consort easily with the web of normal social relations, is not just a function of the incapacity of the Jews two thousand years ago to receive Jesus’ message. In a MS from 1797 or 1798 on ‘Love’ (Knox, 302–8; Nohl 378–82), Hegel points out that property relations, since they essentially attribute exclusive dominion over things, pose a limit to the complete union of lovers. It is the same insight by which he interprets the demand for community of property in the early church. And here he sees that the demands of the church conflict with those of civil society. In a civil society which is coterminous with a church, as was the case in medieval and modern Europe, there cannot but be strains.13

Again, Hegel points out in another MS (Nohl 219–30; Knox 151–65) that the decline of pagan religion before Christianity is due obviously to an inner weakness in ancient society; the ancient religions of beauty which united spirit with nature and to whom thus the spirit of domination was foreign declined with ancient freedom. When the polis with which all its citizens could identify gave way to the rule of some classes over others and eventually to the great empires, men could no longer see the state as an emanation of themselves, but they were only its instruments. But when men no longer gave themselves their own law in the political realm, the vision of autonomy disappeared from the divine realm as well. Men accepted a positive religion and along with this a doctrine of their own corruption (Nohl, 225–6). This doctrine was thus not gratuitously accepted in replacement of the old religion; it gained credence because in a sense corruption was the reality, it ‘agreed with experience’; a religion of slaves was quite naturally accepted by slaves.

In what way do these hints of the inevitability of separation (Trennung) point a way beyond the failure of Christianity? Because they are the germs of the later Hegelian doctrine that the separation of Judaeo-Christianity had to happen because it was essential to the full realization of man, that this realization involved more than a recovery of Greek unity, but rather a synthesis of Greek unity and the freedom of autonomous spirit.

It is not likely that Hegel ever thought the task of the age was simply to recover the lost unity of Greek society, or indeed that he ever thought this recovery possible. From the beginning, as I have said, his thought was polarized as well by the matchless achievement of his own age, the Enlightenment, and by the Christian religion. But this is not to say that he realized all at once at the beginning just what irreversible changes separate us from the ancients and just how profound the opposition was between ancient and modern spirit.

Indeed, the view I am trying to expound here is that this dawned slowly on him as he tried to deepen his vision of a restored society which would combine the expressive unity of the Greeks with the freedom of Enlightenment rationality in the context of a purified Christianity. He gradually took the full measure of the fundamental oppositions between the different poles of his allegiance. In examining how to restore Christianity to its original supposed agreement with the aspirations to expressive unity and autonomy, he began to see how deeply at odds these aspirations were. Thus by the end of his Frankfurt period he has come to sense that the religion of Jesus, with its uncompromising aspiration to a universal community of love, is somehow incombinable with the confident public religion which sustained the life of the polis. Its demands are too high, and it must rather breed disaffection and withdrawal from the city. The germ is here for the mature Hegel’s thesis that Christianity as the attempt to reconcile man with universal spirit had to burst beyond the bounds of the polis where the unity of human and divine was bought at the expense of a certain parochialism.

Similarly, we can see the foreshadowing in this MS on the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ of the later view that the Greek polis cannot and should not be restored because it is incombinable with the modern spirit of individual freedom, as reflected inter alia in civil society and its property relations. The germ of this is present in the insight that a community founded integrally on mutual love cannot find a place for private property.

And now, most important of all, he sees that the demands of Kantian autonomous morality and those of expressive unity are opposed.

Thus as he came to realize that separation was unavoidable, that men could not help falling away from the beautiful unity of the Greeks, he was also coming to see that this separation was essential, that men had to go through it in order to fulfil their vocation as free rational beings.

Hence the realization that Kantian freedom cannot be combined with Greek expressive unity does not lead him to abandon one of the poles of his thought, the Enlightenment notion of rational freedom as Kant formulated it best of all. On the contrary, Hegel holds firm to his original three reference points. Rather this division, along with those I mentioned earlier, lead him to a basic reformulation of the task.

At the end of 1800 Hegel left his preceptoral job at Frankfurt and went to Jena where he took up a new career as a teacher of philosophy at the University, this under the stimulus and with the help of his younger friend Schelling. In this last period at Frankfurt and the first year or so at Jena, his conception of the predicament of the age altered and assumed something like its final form.

Originally, as we saw, Hegel thought of the regeneration of the age as a recovery of unity within and between men which would at the same time be an achievement of autonomy. These two goals far from conflicting would be identical, that is, different descriptions of the same achievement. But as he begins to see that the demands of radical autonomy based on reason, and the demands of expressive unity or wholeness are opposed, his conception of the task of realizing them together comes to be transformed. Where originally he sees the task as that of recovering unity and overcoming separation, he now comes to see it as one of reconciling opposition. Where earlier separation is simply a falling away, and to be done away with, in the mature system it is seen as inextricably bound up with the development of freedom. Hence there is not just a conflict between the requirements of human fulfilment and man’s historical predicament, but there is an opposition between the different requirements themselves of man’s realization. Thus the problem cannot be solved by a victory of one side over the other, by a simple undoing of separation in a spirit of unity, rather the two sides must be brought somehow to unity while each requirement is integrally satisfied. This is the task – perhaps an impossible one – which Hegel’s mature system is meant to encompass.

In this sense Hegel comes around the turn of the century to a formulation of the problem which I have argued was the central one for the Romantic generation, how to unite expressive wholeness and radical freedom, Spinoza and Kant. He followed his own itinerary getting there, although he touched at most of the stations of the Romantic journey: the enthusiasm for the Greeks, the vogue of Kant, the heady hopes of 1789, the influence of Spinoza, the yearning for a restored Christianity. But he was very definitely to find his own way out. And that is why he is still worth studying.

But at the time of the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ MS, although Hegel is already exploring the tensions between the three poles of his thought, his conception of regeneration is still one of unity which overcomes separation. Love is this recovered unity and it has no further room for division: ‘To love God is to feel oneself in the “all” of life, with no restrictions, in the infinite’… ‘Love alone has no limits’ (Knox, 247).

And even more unequivocally

Since the divine is pure life, anything and everything said of it must be free of any (implications of) opposition.(Knox, 255)14

 

In Hegel’s first published work in his new career as a university teacher of philosophy, the Differenz of 1801, we see the transformed perspective. Hegel posits that the formal task of philosophy is ‘the cancellation of division’ (75, die Aufhebung der Entzweiung). But he makes clear that the way to solve the problem is not to ‘abolish one of the opposites and raise the other to infinity’. Both separation and identity (Trennung and Identität) must be given their rights. And hence, in a famous formulation,

But the Absolute itself is thus the identity of identity and non-identity; opposition and unity are both in it.15

In this transformation of perspective all of Hegel’s earlier analyses of the rise of separation – his study of the diremption of religious consciousness with Abraham, his hints about the decline of the ancient city – are not set aside; they are woven into the mature position. But they are seen as more than just misfortunes. They are seen as necessary developments, and that in the two senses we outlined above; that is, they are ineluctable, but they are also essential for the realization of man. They are essential because the realization of man as a spiritual being, hence a free rational being, requires that he break out of the original unity of the tribe. Man becomes a free rational subject by giving himself to rational thought alone and rejecting all other allegiances. And this must mean a break, with other men who are not similarly devoted to reason, with the millenial tradition of one’s society, with the parochial custom of one’s community which cannot stand up at the bar of universal reason. Men must abandon mythical thought where the images of the divine or spiritual are found in nature, and cleave to the bare concept. And this means a break within man as well, as the criteria of reasoning are shaken free of the matrix of desires and feelings which also motivate us, and reasoning in order to be an autonomous activity has to abstract, to subsume the realities of life under concepts which prescind from much of our lived experience.

Hegel seems to have been slower in taking this point, that separation was essential for freedom, than other thinkers of his generation. This is perhaps because he did not feel the impact of Fichte and the Wissenschaftslehre in the middle 1790s with anything like the force that Schelling, or the Romantic thinkers, or even Hölderlin did; perhaps because he was far from its epicentre, serving as a perceptor in Berne. But having got the point, Hegel thought it through more consistently, rigourously and thoroughly than anyone else in his generation, and this, as we saw in the last section, is what ultimately separated him from the Romantics. And it is in virtue of this that he grows beyond Schelling and parts philosophical company with him at the end of his Jena period, a break consummated in the preface to his PhG where he describes Schelling’s absolute as an ‘abyss’ (Abgrund) in which all differences disappear, a night of indistinction, as it were, ‘in which all cows are black’ (PhG, 18–9).

Hegel comes to see separation from nature as both ineluctable and essential. But he saw it as both inseparably. In other words, he developed along with this new perspective a notion of history as the necessary unfolding of a certain human destiny. This is the Hegelian reinterpretation of Providence. As against the blithely optimistic eighteenth-century notion of Providence as the perfect dovetailing of a well-joined universe into the purposes of God for man, a vision which Hegel never ceased to treat with scorn, Hegel developed a view of history as the unfolding of a purpose from within, through tragic conflict to a higher reconciliation. Separation ineluctably occurs because it is essential for man. But men also need unity, with society and with nature within and without. They are thus driven to a tragic conflict in which two incompatible ends claim their allegiance. But if this conflict is ineluctable because essential, then so must the higher reconciliation be in which these two goals are fulfilled together. History moves to heal the wounds it made.16

Thus Hegel takes up in his own way a category of thought which we have seen was already current in the Romantic generation: history as a circle, or rather spiral, in which unity gives way to division, and then is recovered on a higher level.17

Thus at about the time he moved to Jena, Hegel also moved his perception of the predicament of the age more into line with the dilemma defined by Romantic thinkers. Thus it was that the move to Jena was also one into the orbit of the young Schelling, then at the height of his success. And it brought with it a transposition of Hegel’s thoughts into the terms of post-Kantian philosophy.18 And here we come to a second transformation which would have definitive significance for the final system.

For this transposition is not just one of medium, and not just occasioned by Hegel’s new career; it corresponds to another important transformation in Hegel’s position. In the early MSS, and still in the ‘spirit of Christianity’ MS, Hegel believes that the unity recovered in love cannot be adequately expressed in conceptual thought. It is beyond the understanding in this sense. Hegel expresses this clearly in the poem that he wrote for Hölderlin in 1796, ‘Eleusis’:

 

       Dem Sohn der Weihe war der hohen Lehren Fülle

       Des unaussprechlichen Gefühles Tiefe viel zu heilig,

       Als daß er trockne Zeichen ihrer würdigte.

       Schon der Gedanke faßt die Seele nicht,

       Die außer Zeit und Raum in Ahndung der Unendlichkeit

       Versunken, sich vergißt, und wieder zum Bewußtsein nun

       Erwacht. Wer gar davon zu andern sprechen wollte,

       Spräch er mit Engelzungen, fühlt’ der Worte Armut.19

And again in a fragment of the Frankfurt period, Hegel speaks of the unity of Religion, or love, as ‘a miracle we cannot grasp’ (Nohl, 377).

But in Hegel’s final position, philosophy occupies the highest place, just because it is the only fully adequate expression of the highest unity, the medium in which spirit comes totally to itself, and hence the development of philosophical thought is essential to the perfection of this highest synthesis.20

It is true that there is an important thread of continuity which runs through this change. In speaking in the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ of the limits of the intellect, Hegel speaks of the unity of love being beyond the ‘understanding’ (Verstand), which he equates with ‘absolute division, the destruction of life’ (Knox, 264)21 ‘Every reflection annuls love’ (Knox, 253).

Now these terms continue to designate modes of thought which cannot grasp the unity of opposites right into the mature system. Indeed, the term ‘Verstand’ has a remarkable stability throughout the development of Hegel’s thought from the earliest beginnings. It represents always the kind of understanding which abstracts from experience, analyses and keeps the elements so abstracted rigidly separated, above all the form of thought which fixes distinctions and makes them unbridgeable, and therefore is incapable of understanding the whole. ‘Reflection’ designates the mode of thought which describes man and the world under categories of division and opposition, or as applied to a domain of concepts, it designates the domain of paired opposed terms. It is therefore essentially a thought of Trennung.

But what changes through this consistency in vocabulary is that Hegel in the early manuscripts does not see a possibility of conceptual thought beyond understanding and reflection. Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that with the growing intuition that expressive unity and Kantian reason are not combinable ideals, his faith in such a higher mode of conceptual thought vanishes. In the new position which he comes to at Jena, however, that faith triumphantly returns; indeed, he would not agree to call it a ‘faith’; it is the cornerstone of his philosophical system, the Hegelian notion of Vernunft (Reason).

We can readily understand this change, at least in part, in relating it to the previously mentioned one, Hegel’s growing realization that the final synthesis must have a place for separation as well as unity. Separation was essential for rational autonomy. And a synthesis which incorporates rational autonomy has to be expressed in the language of reason, as we noted in the previous section. Hence Hegel gives a new sense to Reason, as opposed to understanding, and seeks the fullest synthesis in philosophy. Hegel saw that a synthesis which reconciled the opposition of freedom and integral expression, as against just returning to the original, undifferentiated unity, required philosophical statement. On this he parts company with the Romantics.

A third important change which Hegel’s views underwent in this transition period when he was first at Jena displaced the centre of gravity in his thought from man to Geist.

We saw in the last chapter how Hegel came finally to a notion of spirit which was neither the transcendent God of theism, nor simply equivalent to the spirit of man. This spirit is a cosmic one, but man is the vehicle of his spiritual life.

Now this represented an evolution on Hegel’s part. He started out at Tübingen with a position which was really theistic, since he agreed with the Kantian thesis that God’s existence is a necessary postulate of practical reason. But around the middle 1790s he seems to have abandoned, partly under Schelling’s influence, the notion of a personal transcendent God, and accepted rather some notion of spirit, or at least life, which at any rate could not be set over against man and the world as the God of theism must be.

But although Hegel nowhere defines his conception of the absolute in this period, and while he does not want to equate it simply with restored man, nevertheless his conception of religion, i.e., man’s relation to this absolute, is very man-centered in his Berne and Frankfurt periods. Thus he accepts at first the Kantian notion that the moral law can be totally derived from the demands of man’s (that is, ultimately, the individual’s) reason; and he sees the restored unity with nature and within man as being identical with this recovery of autonomy. It is a unity in which man remains the centre-piece, drawing his inspiration out of himself rather than seeking to conform to a larger order outside himself. Even with the critical stance towards Kantian morality which appears in the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ MS, it remains true that the man who has reconnected with love derives his pattern of feeling and action out of himself rather than discovering it in a wider order, even though he is thus connecting with a larger current of life. Jesus is portrayed as self-sufficient spiritually as a man. These aspects of the Gospel which do not fit with this picture – Jesus talking of a ‘father’ to whom he ‘prays’, his talk of ‘sin’ and ‘forgiveness’ - all this is explained in a ‘demythologizing’ way, as the language which he had to use to communicate to the people of his time. And Hegel makes very clear that Jesus was not in principle exceptional among men in this regard, although it (Knox, 268) turned out tragically that he was so in fact. His idea was that after his death the community he left behind would become fully independent as he was in their communion with the spirit of love; this was, indeed, one of the reasons why he accepted an early death.

The Hegel of the early theological manuscripts thus has a man-centred view of human regeneration.22 Indeed, at times it would appear that man is the only spiritual being, although he must unite with a larger life to recover wholeness.23

The mature Hegel has broken with this view, and adopted a notion of the absolute as Geist. Man as a spiritual being is related to a larger scheme of spiritual activity. Kantian formalism, the attempt to derive the content of duty from the necessary form of reason, is constantly attacked as vain and empty, and this precisely because men can only discover the real content of ethical life by seeing themselves as part of a larger scheme. This is not supposed to be a regression to heteronomy in that the larger scheme is that of Geist with which man comes to identify as his indispensable vehicle, as we saw in the last section. How well this solution stands up we must examine later. The point is here that while claiming to avoid heteronomy Hegel has broken with his earlier, Kant-influenced, man-centred formulations of autonomy. Freedom is no longer just drawing the law or the inspiration of love from oneself.

It is likely that this shift is bound up with the others we discussed above. In coming to see that the demands of man’s autonomy pulled in a different direction from the demands of unity with the whole, he was forced to a re-assessment of the place of man-centred autonomy in his total vision of things. Recovering unity just with a larger current of life is now seen to be not enough for a spiritual being. On the contrary, reuniting with the whole must mean regaining contact with a cosmic spirit. But this synthesis must unite the separation essential to man-centred autonomy and the expressive unity with nature. It cannot be simply equivalent to either, but must be higher than both. Hence this man-centred autonomy can no longer be the absolute goal. It must be set in a wider synthesis, and this is what the mature Hegel claims to do.

Of course, this development in Hegel’s thought cannot be seen as powered simply by these logical connections between his intellectual goals. It is likely that it was also influenced by the train of events in his time. Without our being able to be sure because of the lack of evidence, it is probable that the early Hegel was quite radical politically. In the early days at Tübingen young radicals followed the progress of events in Paris with interest and enthusiasm. And while it is not likely that they wanted simply to re-edit the French Revolution in Germany, and certainly not its Jacobin phase – for all that the reactionaries dubbed them all with the title ‘Jacobin’-nevertheless it is probable that they favoured far-reaching political change in the direction of equality and popular representation. Even in 1798 Hegel wrote a pamphlet as an intended contribution to the debate on the constitutional future of his native Württemberg (it was never published) which seems to have advocated election of the Landtag by at any rate a larger franchise.

The mature Hegel on the other hand was not a political radical at all. It is easy, however, to misconceive the change. It is too simple and misleading to see it simply as a shift from left to right. First, it is probable that the ‘organic’ notions of the state, derived from the Greeks, the distrust of the ‘mob’ acting outside any institutional framework, the stress on differentiated function, these ideas which are so important to his later political theory were there at the beginning. And reciprocally, the mature Hegel incorporates a great deal of the principles of 1789, more than were incorporated in the Prussian state of his time of which he is so often accused of being the apologist, and more in some respects than many contemporary bourgeois writers if one thinks of his prophetic mistrust of the thrust of a capitalist economy.

The change rather lies in his conception of the role of willed action to political change. The regeneration he looks for in the 1790s is something which seems largely to have to be done by religious and political transformation. In the later system the fulfilment of man’s destiny is something which is in train; it is incumbent on men to recognize and live in relation to it. Of course, here too we can easily misconceive the difference. To recognize one’s connection with Geist is ipso facto to change oneself and the way one acts and in important respects. A change of consciousness cannot just be opposed to a change in reality; they are bound up together; and this link between the two was important from the beginning of Hegel’s thought, for which religious transformation was central. But there is a difference nonetheless between a view which sees widespread willed social and political transformation as something to be done by those who would achieve regeneration and a view which sees the relevant social and political transformations as needing to be discerned and hence accepted and lived in the right spirit.

This is the fourth major change which came over Hegel’s position and which came to maturity somewhat later than the others. But although maturing at a different pace, it is clearly linked with the third. The man-centred conception of regeneration naturally goes with the prospect of a willed transformation of institutions to realize the desired end. But with the development of a notion of Geist as a subject greater than man, Hegel developed a notion of historical process which could not be explained in terms of conscious human purposes, but rather by the greater purposes of Geist. The transformations in political, social, religious institutions which must come about if man is to fulfil his destiny are no longer seen as tasks which men must consciously accomplish; on the contrary, although they are carried through by men, these do not fully understand the part they are playing until after they have come about. This is the mature Hegelian doctrine of the ‘cunning of reason’ and the retrospective understanding of history which Hegel expressed in that famous phrase of the Preface to the Philosophy of Right, that ‘the owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with the falling of the dusk’.24

In other words the notion that man is related to a larger, cosmic subject went along with a displacement of the subject of history in Hegel’s thought, who is no longer simply man – if indeed, he ever clearly conceived it as such – but Geist. What needs to be done in the sense of carried through by intentional action is thus not the institutional transformations of history, for these can no longer be intentionally encompassed in this sense, but rather the recognition of what Geist has in train and the connecting of oneself to it. It is this, of course, that the young Marx was protesting against when he complained that ‘philosophers’ had only interpreted the world, whereas the task was to change it. The young Hegel would have been closer to agreeing with him than the mature philosopher.

Thus these four transpositions in Hegel’s position which take place around the time he goes to Jena and carry through the Jena period into his mature position, are related: the acceptance of separation as part of the ultimate unity, the shift to philosophy as the crucial medium, the shift from a man-centred theory to one centred on Geist, and the notion that man’s realization is not planned by him, out can only be recognized post hoc. The first two are linked through Hegel’s sense of the connection between separation and autonomy, autonomy and rationality; the opposition between autonomy and expressive unity leads him to a notion of Geist as greater than man, and Geist as the subject of history transforms his view of history. Man’s task is now to recognize, and to recognize clearly, not by a cloudy intuition which would deny his vocation to rational autonomy; and thus the apex of human realization, which turns out to be the realization of Geist, lies in philosophical awareness.

From this vantage point, we can see more clearly that this complex shift in Hegel’s thought was also probably motivated by the political events of the time. In the early 1790s many young radical Germans had hopes of revolutionary developments in their homeland. By the end of the decade, these had faded: the ancien régime in Germany was plainly proof to any transformation within. The main hope of change remained the French Army, and later its leader Napoleon. Hegel seems to have been one of those Germans who judged favourably the results of Napoleonic hegemony in the 1800s. But the changes wrought thereby were not as radical as those dreamt of in the early 1790s, nor did this revolution from without induce a sense of self-activity. In the late 1790s and early 1800s Germany seemed incapable of rising to the challenge of the dissolution of the Empire under the blows of the French Revolutionary Army and of finding a rejuvenated form. It was not a vantage point from which it was easy to believe that men consciously and deliberately make their own history.

Of course, this is not the whole story as far as Hegel was concerned. There was another moment of hope, after Napoleon shattered Prussia at the battle of Jena, and a spirit of renewal seemed about to take hold of Germany, spearheaded by the reforms of Baron vom Stein. Hegel seems to have been relatively unmoved by this. Perhaps he had already set in a certain mould; in this realm early experiences are more important than later ones. In any case, the movement of renewal was squashed after the Restoration.

Let us now turn to examine Hegel’s mature position.

 

 

1 Cf. H.S. Harris: Hegel’s Development, Oxford, 1972, II, 4.

2 Published by H. Nohl as one of the ‘Fragmente über Volksreligion und Christentum’, Cf. his Hegel’s Theologische Jugendschriften, Tübingen, 1907, 1–72.

3 This notion shows the stamp of that pervasive influence of Pietism on much German thought in this period, and of its partial fusion with some of the aspirations of the Enlightenment. This marriage can be seen, for instance, in Lessing; and it seems that Lessing greatly influenced Hegel’s thought about religion as a student in Gymnasium and University. Cf. above p. 12, Hegel’s subjective religion is also defined in opposition to a religion of ‘cold booklearning’ condemned by Recha in Lessing’s Nathan, a play often quoted or referred to in Hegel’s early writings.

4 We can see from this how much Lukács’ attack in Derjunge Hegelon the standard interpretation of Hegel’s early writings as centring around reflection about religion runs the risk of distorting his thought in this period. Lukács speaks of this ‘theological’ approach to the young Hegel as ‘a reactionary legend’. Hegel’s early writings should rather be seen as at grips with the problems of political revolution and change.

Of course, particular interpretations of Hegel’s early religious views, like those of Haering, Wahl, Kroner, are open to criticism. But Lukács’ global objection involves introducing a false dichotomy into Hegel’s thought. We cannot oppose a central concern for religion to one for political reform and freedom, when Hegel’s thought in the 1790s was precisely characterized by a view of religion nurtured on expressivist theory and inspired by the Greeks in which religious life and social relations were inseparable. Of course, the young Hegel longed to see the restoration of moral autonomy and political liberty, but this was to him inseparable from, hence unrealizable without a profound religious regeneration.

From a different standpoint, Walter Kaufmann also objects to the designation ‘theological’ applied to Hegel’s early writings, and suggests rather the description anti-theological essays (cf. ‘The Young Hegel and Religion’, in Hegel, ed. A. Maclntyre, Anchor 1972,61-100). But this too is very misleading. Hegel is strongly against theology in the sense of dead formulae as opposed to subjective religion, that is, living piety. But these writings are best understood as an attempt to find out how to restore a relation to God or Spirit or Life or the Infinite (Hegel’s designations and also his conception change through this decade) in which this living piety can come again into its own.

It is also a bit quick to ascribe to the young Hegel affinities with the Enlightenment as opposed to the Romantics (Kaufman 72–4). He shared the expressivist mistrust of the ‘understanding’, the attempt to capture the living in abstract formulae and fragment it. This came to him through thinkers like Herder and Goethe who from one point of view can plausibly be called men of the Enlightenment. But this expressivist theory also becomes an essential element in Romanticism. It is very misleading to claim it for one side against the other.

5 From Harris, Hegel’s Development, p. 499, slightly amended.

I. ‘Ihre Lehren müssen auf der allgemeinen Vernunft gegründet sein.’

II. ‘Phantasie, Herz und Sinnlichkeit müssen dabei nicht leer ausgehen.’

III. ‘Sie muß so beschaffen sein, daß sich alien Bediirfnisse des Lebens, die öffentlichen Staatshandlungen daran anschließen.’ (Nohl 20).

6 ‘das lebendige Gefiihl seines eigenen Herzens von Pflicht und Recht’. Nohl, 158.

7 But the opposition of positive to’ natural’ religion comes to pose serious problems in Hegel’s mind, as he says in a revised (1800) variant of the beginning of this MS.

8 Hegel (Nohl, 215) speaks of Christianity as an agent of disenchantment: ‘Das Christentum hat Walhalla entvölkert, die heilegen Haine umgehauen, und die Phantasie des Volks als schändlichen Aberglauben, als ein teufliches Gift ausgerottet…’ (‘Christianity has depopulated Valhalla, hewn down the sacred groves, and rooted out the phantasy of the people as shameful superstition, as a diabolical poison.’)

9 Nohl, 266. Hegel speaks of ‘dieser über Moralität erhabene Geist Jesu’.

10 ‘Jener den Herm aufier sich, dieser aber den Herrn in sich trägt, zugleich aber sein eigener Knecht isť (Nohl, 266).

11 A more unfair slur is that of Pharisaism against the Kantian moralist (Knox, 220). Hegel’s notion here of the affinity between the moral philosophy of Kant and the religion of Abraham can also be found in Hölderlin’s equating Kant and Moses. ‘Kant ist der Moses unserer Nation’, he says in a letter to his brother, ‘der sie aus der ägyptischen Erschlaffung in die freie einsame Wüste seiner Spekulation führt…’ (SW, III, 367). Kant wakes us from slumber but this separation takes us into a desert. Hölderlin sees here that the Kantian separation was necessary, and in this he takes the same position as the mature Hegel.

12 The idea here is basically the same as that of the ‘beautiful soul’ in the PhG. Hegel’s critical stance towards it there is already foreshadowed in the ambivalence he shows towards it in this study of Jesus and his church.

13 In commenting the evangelical injunction to despise riches, Hegel says: ‘the fate of property has become too powerful for us to tolerate reflections on it, to find its abolition thinkable’ (Knox, 221).

14 Weil das Göttliche reines Leben ist, so muß notwending, wenn von ihm und was von ihm gesprochen wird, nichts Entgegengesetzes in sich enthalten.

15 Das Absolute selbst aber ist darum die Identität der Identität und der Nichtidentität; Entgegensetzen und Einssein ist zugleich in ihm. Already in the ‘System Fragment’, a MS of 1800, Hegel talked of the sought for synthesis, life, as ‘die Verbindung der Verbindung und der Nichtverbindung’ (Nohl, 348).

16 We already see this idea foreshadowed in the notion of fate in the MS on the ‘Spirit of Christianity’. What befalls us is the vengeance of life for our transgression against it, but precisely for that reason it opens the possibility of reconciliation. We see another illustration of the importance for Hegel of Greek tragedy in the development of his philosophy of history.

17 This too is foreshadowed in the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ MS (Nohl, 318; Knox, 273), where it is a question of unity lost and restored, and Hegel puts the three stages in parallel to the three persons of the Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, an important theme of his mature work.

18 Of course philosophical terms are frequent in Hegel’s writings of the 1790s. In his analysis of Abraham he speaks of the opposition of unity and multiplicity, while his critique of Kant in the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ is partly couched in terms of the opposition of universal and individual. And there is much mention of subjectivity and objectivity, nature and freedom, and so on. But what is new in the Jena period is a serious coming to grips with the language of post-Kantian philosophy, with Fichte and Schelling, with the Ego, and its relation to the non-Ego, both theoretical and practical.

19 For the initiate, the fullness of the lofty doctrine and the depths of ineffable feeling, were much too holy for him to honour dry signs with them. For thought cannot grasp the soul which forgetting itself plunges out of space and time into a presentiment of infinity, and now re-awakens. Whoever wanted to speak of this to others, though he spoke with the tongues of angels, would feel the poverty of words.

20 That he came so late to this philosophical enterprise, although it put him for a while behind – and under the wing of – the younger but more philosophically versed Schelling, actually helped him surpass Schelling and the rest of his followers. The fact that he had pondered so long on man’s religious and social development made him use the categories of post-Kantian idealism with a much richer field of reference and to incomparably greater effect. Fichte and Schelling were thoroughly at home – too much at home – in the jargon of the Ego, the non-Ego, Subjectivity and Objectivity, etc. Schelling also absorbed the poetic vision of nature from Goethe and the Romantics which he transposed in his philosophy of Nature. But with Hegel philosophy is used to illuminate the whole field of human history – political, religious, philosophical, artistic. This was unprecedented. Fichte, for all that he was thoroughly engagé as an intellectual, is hardly someone one would turn to to understand the historical significance and philosophical relevance of the great events of his time.

21 ‘die absolute Trennung, das Töten’ (Nohl, 311).

22 After Hegel’s death, the dispute between man- and God-centred conceptions broke out again among his intellectual heirs over the interpretation of his system and its import. The ‘old Hegelians’ pushed his philosophy in the direction of orthodox theism, the ‘young Hegelians’ towards a man-centred interpretation in which Geist became identical with man. This culminated in the works of Feuerbach and the young Marx. Both these twists are of course untrue to the Hegelian synthesis which is meant to be neither theist or atheist; but if I am right the young Hegel had some affinities with the later young Hegelians, which the mature Hegel had shed. This was of course not known at the time since the early MSS were not published until much later. But it is not surprising that Marxists with affinities with early Marx should find the young Hegel an interesting study: cf. G. Lukács, Der Junge Hegel.

23 As seems implied by a description of the goal of unity aimed at as ‘To find peace in a non-personal living beauty’ (Knox, 301) (‘in einer unpersönlichen lebendigen Schönheit Ruhe zu finden’, Nohl, 342).

24 PR, 13.

 
    