## CHAPTER XX
## Hegel Today
1
This magnificent Hegelian synthesis has dissolved. After achieving an extraordinary ascendancy over the German intellectual world in the 1820s and 1830s, it began to wane a decade after his death in 1831. We think of the 1840s as the great age of rebellion against the Hegelian system, the age of the Young Hegelians, Feuerbach, Ruge, Stirner, Marx, the time also when Kierkegaard began his short, intense intellectual career.

But to be the object of virulent attack by a generation of young thinkers is still to be very much on the agenda. Much worse was in store for Hegel’s absolute idealism. In the 1850s and 1860s it fell into virtual oblivion. Hegel was vaguely remembered in Bismarckian Germany as the state philosopher of ‘Restoration’ Prussia, and peripherally approved of or vilified in consequence. There is an amusing bit of correspondence between Marx and Engels of the 1870s in which they give vent to their impatience at the ignorance of the younger generation. The occasion was a footnote by a young Social-Democratic editor in which he referred to Hegel as the philosopher of the ‘royal Prussian Idea of the state’.1 The incident illustrates how much the Hegelian roots of Marx and Engels’ thought came to be misunderstood even in their own movement.

Hegel, of course, made a ‘comeback’ in Germany towards the end of the century. Lasson’s critical work in producing new, more scholarly editions of his work stimulated and was stimulated by this renewed interest. Dilthey helped to make Hegel an important reference point in the great German debate about the status of the Geisteswissenschaften, which influenced, among others, Max Weber. Dilthey started the inquiry into Hegel’s development by re-examining his writings of the 1790s, an enquiry which continues to this day. At the same time, Hegel’s influence began to spread abroad. ‘Hegelianism’, although of an oddly transposed variety, became important in England and America, through Green, Bradley, Bosanquet, Royce. For some decades it was dominant at Oxford. In the 1930s interest in Hegel, along with Marx, began to grow in the French philosophical world; while from the turn of the century, Hegel became an important pole of philosophical thought in Italy, mainly through the work of Croce and Gentile.

This renewed interest continues unabated to this day. Interrupted on the anglo-saxon scene by the reaction against the British ‘Hegelians’, it is nevertheless returning. But with all this attention focussed on Hegel, his actual synthesis is quite dead. That is, no one actually believes his central ontological thesis, that the universe is posited by a Spirit whose essence is rational necessity. Many men believe today that the world was created by God. Some hold as well to some ‘de-mythologized’ interpretation of this view. All the different types of materialist and naturalist views have their defenders. But no one holds the Hegelian ontology. Many much less ‘relevant’ thinkers (in the eyes of our contemporaries), such as the mainstream writers of the Enlightenment – Helvétius, Holbach, Bentham – or the ‘reactionaries’ such as Burke, can boast followers today in this sense, i.e., people who share their ontological or metaphysical views.

And in general it is true of the Hegelian revival which begins in the late nineteenth century that it is in no sense a revival of Hegel’s central thesis. Croce in his famous work of 1907, What is living and what is dead of the philosophy of Hegel,2 relegates the Logic and philosophy of nature to the latter category. Dilthey similarly tries to salvage the penetrating interpretation of historical forms while jettisoning the claims of the system to reach completion in a manifestation of rational necessity. History shows an open-ended series of transformations, forms whose significance is to be ‘understood’ (in the sense of ‘verstehen’), but none of these give history its definitive meaning.

The British Hegelians do appear to be making stronger ontological claims, comparable to Hegel’s. But on closer examination their views generally turn out to be significantly different. Bradley’s dialectic, for instance, ends up showing how the only complete and undistorted truth, that of the whole, cannot be conceptually formulated. His conclusion is directiy contrary to Hegel’s logico-ontology.

Why is Hegel’s central thesis dead? And why at the same time is his philosophy highly relevant to our time in a whole host of ways, as I have tried to show in the course of this work, and as current interest attests? I should like to try to adumbrate an answer to this double question in this concluding chapter. Normally one might expect the conclusion of a book on Hegel to dwell on the succession of influences his thought has had and new departures it has triggered. But the central items on the list – Marx, Kierkegaard, existentialism, etc. – are too well known, and the whole list is much too long3 to make this a worthwhile undertaking. It would be more useful to try to account for his continuing relevance by seeing how the basic problems and aspirations underlying his philosophy have evolved since his day. For this is what we need to find an answer to our double question, how his thought can remain important while his conclusions are quite abandoned.

Part of the answer to the question, why Hegel’s ontology was abandoned, lies in the development of modern civilization in an increasingly industrial, technological, rationalized direction. This civilization is in a sense the heir of the Enlightenment. Now while Hegel’s philosophy claims to be the fulfilment of Enlightenment thought, he in fact tries to combine with this, and with each other, two strands of thought and sensibility which were as much reactions to as extensions of the Enlightenment. If we return to its basic intentions, which we explored in the first chapter, Hegel’s philosophy can be seen as an attempt to realize a synthesis that the Romantic generation was groping towards: to combine the rational, self-legislating freedom of the Kantian subject with the expressive unity within man and with nature for which the age longed.

Hegel wanted to realize this synthesis in fully rational form, and that is what makes him an heir of the Enlightenment, and what marks him off from the Romantics. But it remains true that he was moved by philosophical purposes which went beyond and against the main trend of the Enlightenment, whether deist or materialist. I tried to characterize this roughly in the opening chapter in terms of the notion of a self-defining identity. Following on the seventeenth century revolution, men came to define themselves no longer in relation to a cosmic order, but as subjects who possessed their own picture of the world within them as well as an endogenous motivation, their own purposes or drives. Along with this new notion of subjectivity went what I called an ‘objectification ‘of the world. That is, the world was no longer seen as the reflection of a cosmic order to which man was essentially related, but as a domain of neutral, contingent fact, to be mapped by the tracing of correlations, and ultimately manipulated in fulfilment of human purposes. This vision of an objectified, neutral world was, as we saw, valued as a confirmation of the new identity before even it came to be important as the basis of our mastery over nature.

The objectification extends beyond external nature to englobe human life and society and the result is a certain vision of man, an associationist psychology, utilitarian ethics, atomistic politics of social engineering, and ultimately a mechanistic science of man.

The conception of human life I have called ‘expressivist’, which develops with Herder and Rousseau among others, is in part a reaction to this. It is a rejection of the view of human life as mere external association of elements without intrinsic connection: of the human psyche as an assemblage of ‘faculties’, of man as a compound of body and soul, of society as a concatenation of individuals, of action as the fitting of means to external ends, of pleasure as the merely contingent consequence of certain actions, of right and wrong as residing in the external consequences of actions, of virtue and vice as the fruit of different concatenations of circumstances producing a different web of associations. Expressivism returns to the sense of the intrinsic value of certain actions or modes of life, to qualitative distinctions between good and bad. And these actions or modes of life are seen as wholes, as either true expressions or distortions of what we authentically are. It rebels against the dichotomizing of man into body and soul, spirit and nature, the conception of society as an instrument of independent individuals, the vision of nature as merely raw material for human purposes.

Similarly, the Kantian notion of rational autonomy was in part a reaction against the uni-dimensional utilitarian conception of man. It was a travesty to reduce the distinction between good and evil simply to the greater or lesser satisfaction of desires. What was at stake was rather a radical qualitative distinction, between self-determination as a rational being and heteronomy.

But the industrial, technological and rationalized civilization which has grown up since the eighteenth century has in an important sense entrenched in its practices and institutions the conception of man which belonged to what I called the main trend of the Enlightenment. And this, as it were, against the protests of Romanticism, which combined within itself in one form or another both the expressivist and the autonomist currents of reaction to the Enlightenment. The technology of industrial society pushes to a more and more extensive subjugation of nature. But what is much more important, industrial civilization enforced repeated re-organizations of society and men’s way of life in the name of efficiency and higher production. Urbanization, factory production, depopulation of countryside and sometimes whole regions, mass emigration, the imposition of a rationalized, rigidly measured pace of life at the expense of the former seasonal rhythm; all these changes and others, whether induced by planning or arising through the hazards of the market and investment patterns, are explained and justified by their greater efficacy in meeting the goals of production. In this respect the utilitarian conception is entrenched in our practices and institutions, that is, a mode of thought in which different ways of living together are assessed not by some supposed intrinsic value, and certainly not by their expressive significance, but by their efficiency in the production of benefits which are ultimately ‘consumed’ by individuals. In this civilization, social relations and practices, as well as nature, are progressively objectified.

This instrumental mode of evaluation is endemic to the institutions of a modern industrial economy, that is, the activities which define these institutions relate them to an external purpose, e.g., profit, efficient production, or growth. And all advanced industrial societies are marked by this, even the Soviet Union, where consumer satisfaction is sacrificed in the name of some other extrinsic goal, such as national security, or ‘surpassing capitalism’, or future satisfaction. This may not have to be so, and China, for instance, may realize another model where economic considerations in this sense are not ultimate. But they have been in industrial civilization to date.

And in the West, many of complementary conceptions of society which have been invoked to mitigate the harsher consequences of the capitalist economy have themselves been off-shoots of the Enlightenment, e.g., notions of equality, of redistribution among individuals, of humanitarian defence of the weak. Of course, Romantic notions have also contributed to modern civilization. For instance the expressivist notion that each man’s fulfilment is unique and cannot be foreseen, much less prescribed, by any other is an essential part of the contemporary belief in individual liberty. And we can see this connection in some of the recognized theorists of modern liberty, von Humboldt, de Tocqueville, J. S. Mill.

But the Romantic strain has been contained, as it were, in modern Western civilization. The major common institutions reflect rather the Enlightenment conception in their defining ideas. This is obviously true of the economic institutions. But it is as true of the growing, rationalized bureaucracies, and it is not much less so of the political structures, which are organized largely to produce collective decision out of the concatenation of individual decisions (through voting) and/or negotiation between groups. The major collective structures of an advanced industrial society tend to appear at best as instruments of production or decision (at worst, as threatening oppressors), whose value must ultimately be measured in what impact they have on the plight of individuals. The influence of Romantic ideas has largely been on the definition of individual fulfilment, for the sake of which these larger structures operate.

Modern civilization has thus seen the proliferation of Romantic views of private life and fulfilment, along with a growing rationalization and bureaucratization of collective structures, and a frankly exploitative stance towards nature. Modern society, we might say, is Romantic in its private and imaginative life and utilitarian or instrumentalist in its public, effective life. What is of ultimate importance in shaping the latter is not what its structures express, but what they get done. The bent of modern society is to treat these structures as a neutral, objectified domain, to be reorganized for maximum effect, although this may be held in check or even periodically over-ridden by powerful collective emotions, principally nationalism, which have their roots in the Romantic period. But the day-by-day predominance of these collective structures over private Romanticism is clearly evident in the exploitation of Romantic images of fulfilment to keep the wheels of industry turning, for instance in much contemporary advertising.

This is why those thinkers who stand in a Romantic or expressivist tradition of whatever kind, disciples of Rousseau, or of de Tocqueville, or Marx, whether they be socialists, anarchists, partisans of ‘participatory democracy’, or admirers of the ancient polis like Hannah Arendt, are all estranged from modern Western society. And those who feel fully at home in it are the heirs of the Enlightenment mainstream, who proclaimed recently (and somewhat prematurely) the ‘end of ideology’ and who accept models like that of the political system as a ‘conversion process’, popular among American political scientists of the last decade.4

From one angle we might see Romanticism as a crisis which occurred at the birth of modern industrial society, which parallels the deep social unrest of the transition and influences and is influenced by it. The crisis, like the social unrest, was overcome as the new society became established. Romanticism was absorbed by being encapsulated in private life, and thus allocated its place in the new society. Parallel to this social absorption was an intellectual one. The scientific outlook of the second half of the nineteenth century incorporated many of the insights of expressivist and Romantic thought, while setting aside the philosophical categories in which they had originally been couched.

Organic conceptions influenced a biology which once more became mechanistic in orientation. They underlie also the sociology of Comte, who nevertheless purges the categories of expression and final cause from science. Developmental conceptions become a central part of the canon of orthodox science with Darwin. And Freud himself pointed out how some of his key notions were anticipated by Romantic writers.

In a sense, therefore, the civilization which develops in Europe in the second half of the nineteenth century tended to entrench the Enlightenment conception of man, in its progressive transformation of nature, in its collective structures and in its most prestigious intellectual achievement, science. And this must provide us part of the explanation why Hegel’s synthesis falls into eclipse around the half century. For it attempted to integrate the expressivist current in more than a subordinate way. The structure of the Hegelian state was to be understood and valued for what it expressed or embodied, the Idea, not for its consequences or achievements. The rationality of the Hegelian state was something quite other than the rationalization of bureaucratic structures. The modern mixture of private Romanticism and public utilitarianism is rather civil society run wild, a society which has become a ‘heap’. The continuous transformation of industrial society under the dynamic or productive efficiency and the search for a higher individual standard of life has eroded the differentiations which were essential to Hegel’s state, and prized the individual more and more loose from any partial grouping. It was in underestimating this dynamic that Hegel was most seriously wrong in his characterization of the coming age.

But this error, if that is the word, is directly connected with his ontology. Hegel thought that the forces of dissolution and homogenization of civil society would be contained because men would come to recognize themselves in the structures which embodied the Idea. Men would recover a new Sittlichkeit and identify with a larger life. The continued progress of these forces could only mean the progressive attenuation of this vision which must become every more unreal and improbable as the new society grows. If Hegel has been right, then men would have recognized themselves in the structures of the rational state, and industrial society would not have taken the path it has.

Parallel to the development of modern society which breaks the bounds of Hegel’s state is a development of modern science. Empirical sciences were meant to be contained within the ‘absolute science’. That is, the results of the empirical sciences should reveal the structure of the Concept, with the degree of approximation and inexactness appropriate to the level of reality concerned. But the sciences had already in his own day broken the bounds of the synthesis which Hegel’s commentary imposed on them, and although the possibility always remains theoretically of recommencing a synthesizing commentary with each new important discovery, the development of the sciences has made the whole project of a philosophy of nature seem futile and misguided. The search for an underlying meaningful structure must seem arbitrary in an ever expanding and diversifying field of scientific knowledge.

Can we conclude then that Hegel’s ontology is no longer a live option because modern civilization has made us all over into self-defining subjects with an objectifying stance towards nature and social life? Not quite. This explanation is too simple because in fact we have not been fully made over. There remains since the Romantic period a malaise around the modern identity. Certainly many of our contemporaries think of themselves primarily as individuals with certain de facto desires and goals; and of their society as a common enterprise of production, exchange and, ideally, mutual help, designed to fulfill their respective desires; so that the important virtues of society are rational organization, distributive justice, and the safe-guarding of individual independence.

But at the same time many – and often the same people – are moved by a sense of the profound inadequacy of modern society which has its roots in the Romantic protest. Since the end of the eighteenth century there has been a continuing stream of complaint against modern civilization as Philistine, productive of mediocrity and conformity, timidly egoistical, as stifling originality, free expression, all the heroic virtues, as dedicated to a ‘pitiable comfort’ (erbärmliches Behagen).5 Reproaches, or at least forebodings, of this order have come from the best and most sensitive minds, and across a broad spectrum, from very moderate and constructive critics, like de Tocqueville and J. S. Mill, to the wildest outsiders, like Nietzsche and Sorel, not to speak of the host of writers and artists who took a stance in opposition to ‘bourgeois’ civilization.

In different ways these critics castigate modern society as expressively dead, as stifling expressive fulfilment through the power of conformity, or through the all-pervasive demands of utility, of producing a world in which all acts, objects, institutions have a use, but none express what men are or could be. This stream of opposition has its source in the expressivist current of the late eighteenth century, and its continued force reflects the degree to which the modern identity has not become securely established.

We might be tempted to think that this current touches only a minority of intellectuals and artists, leave the majority of ‘ordinary’ men unaffected. But the wide resonance of this kind of critique has been shown if nothing else in periodic outbursts of unrest which have troubled industrial civilization. Deep expressivist dissatisfaction contributed to the success of Fascism, and underlies the revolt of many young people against the ‘system’ in contemporary Western countries.

Thus we cannot simply explain the eclipse of Hegel’s ontology by the triumphant establishment of a modern identity which has relegated the Romantic protest to the past. Nothing of the kind has occurred. Rather the question is why the continued flourishing Romantic or expressivist protest can no longer find philosophical expression in Hegel’s vision.

Part of the answer lies in the fact that it is a protest. Hegel’s vision was of a world reconciled to the Spirit, but the Romantic spirit is conscious of being in opposition to modern society. It is a nostalgia for the past, the yearning for an as yet unfulfilled hope, or the determination to realize an unprecedented future, but certainly not the perception of the rationality of the real. And if men who longed for expressive fulfilment felt alienated from the course of modern history in the late nineteenth century, how much greater cause their successors have to feel this today. Prior to 1914, the Philistine society at least offered the solidity of a firmly established order destined to realize more and more fully its own limited, pitiable and unheroic form of good. But the upheavals since that time have called even this into question without setting Western civilization on a higher road of expressive fulfilment. The earnest search for ‘a pitiable comfort’ has been interrupted more by orgies of grotesque inhumanity than by departures toward a new and higher culture. And by a cruel irony, the Romantic protest itself has had its share of responsibility in these gruesome interludes. Various of its themes have been twisted to the service of Fascism, Stalinism, not to speak of the freelance practitioners of indiscriminate assassination of our day.

So that a contemporary is easily tempted to see history as a ‘slaughter bench...onto which the fortune of peoples, the wisdom of states and the virtue of individuals have been brought to sacrifice’. (VG, 80). What he may find hard to understand is how Hegel after writing this line could nevertheless still see history as the realization of reason and freedom. What separates us from that age is the sense that the horrors and nightmares of history, the furies of destruction and cruelty which remain enigmatic to agent and victim, were behind us. This sense, which Hegel expressed in his philosophy – although he seems to have wavered at times in his private judgment – is just about unrecoverable even by the most optimistic of our contemporaries.

So that, whether as a member of a confident, growing modern society, or as a witness of this society’s disintegration, the heir of the Romantics cannot but sense alienation. He cannot see history as the unfolding of spirit. And at the same time he can no longer see nature as the emanation of spirit. The growing control over nature of modern technology, as well as the ever-expanding frontier of science, has dispelled that vision of the world as the manifestation of spiritual powers or a divine principle which was the culmination of the expressivist current of the late eighteenth century. That expressive pantheism, the ‘Spinozism’ of the Sturm und Drang, which tempted Lessing, all but conquered Herder, and was the common property of Goethe and the Romantics, ceases to be a live option as modern civilization entrenches itself. But Hegel’s synthesis was built on this. Its aim, as I have tried to interpret it, was to combine this vision of nature as the expression of spirit, with the implied call to man to recover expressive unity with it, on one hand, with the aspiration to rational autonomy on the other. Spirit, the ontological foundation of the world in rational necessity, is meant to realize this synthesis. It guarantees that man can give himself to unity with the whole without losing his rational freedom. But if this vision of expressive pantheism wanes, if the aspiration to unity with the ‘all of nature’6 ceases to be meaningful, then the very basis disappears for the Absolute Idea, along with Goethe’s Urphänomene, Novalis’ ‘magical idealism’, and the wilder creations of the Romantics.

Thus Hegel’s synthesis cannot command adherents today not only because it is built in part on the expressivist reaction to the modern identity which contemporary civilization has tended to entrench more and more, but because it is built on an earlier and outmoded form of this reaction. It belongs to the opposition while claiming to give us a vision of reason triumphant; and it belongs moreover to a stage of this opposition which no longer appears viable.

2
Thus we can see, in rough outline at least, why Hegel’s central thesis is dead, But why is it that his philosophy remains highly relevant? This will become clearer if we look at the forms of Romantic and expressivist opposition which have succeeded those of Hegel’s time.

If the goal of a return to unity with the geat current of life is no longer plausible, even combined with the spiral vision of history where the restored unity incorporates subjective freedom; if the historial experience of objectifying and transforming nature in theory and practice is too powerful for it to survive as an interlocutor; then the expressivist current of opposition to modern civilization has to focus on man. That which is ‘cabin’d, cribb’d, confin’d ‘by modern society, hemmed in by modern conformity, stamped out by the great machine of Utility, repressed by the ‘system’, is human nature, or rather, the creative, expressive potential of man.

But expressive fulfilment entails a certain integrity, a wholeness of life, which does not admit of division between body and soul, will and inclination, spirit and nature. If this fulfilment no longer means communion with nature as an embodiment of spirit, nature must still figure in it in some fashion.

Later forms of expressivism show this in two ways. Either the realized form of life is seen as expressing our deeper motivation as natural beings which is checked, frustrated or hidden by an artificial, divisive or repressive society. Modern society is seen as the oppressor of the spontaneous, the natural, the sensuous, or the ‘Dionysiac’ in man. In a sense, much of post-Romantic nationalism can be put in this broad category since it seeks to restore particular facts about men – their heredity, the land they live in, the language group they belong to – as centrally relevant motivations in a fulfilled human life, against ‘abstract’ ‘cosmopolitan’ ideals of man.

Or else, man is seen as achieving harmony with nature by transforming it. Philosophy, the contemplation of the Idea in nature and history, as a ‘cult’ which restores our unity to the whole, can have no meaning for those who have lost the sense of the divine in nature, and must seem obscene to those who are in revolt against an inert, oppressive, inhuman society. From within this horizon, the aspiration to expressive unity between man and the natural and social world on which he depends can only be fulfilled by his freely reshaping nature and society. In this kind of vision expressive unity is combined, as in Hegel’s philosophy, with a radical notion of freedom, but in a fundamentally different way. Hegel’s synthesis has been, as it were, anthropologized -transferred from Geist onto man.

This was, of course, the revolutionary transposition which was carried out by the Young Hegelians of the 1830s and 1840s. And it has been of considerable consequence. For the great expressivist protests against the course of modern civilization have incorporated this notion of willed transformation of nature, both human and external, as an essential part of man’s fulfilment. Reactions to the expressive poverty of modern civilization have, of course, varied widely: ‘Weltschmerz’, a deep sense of the world as abandoned and expressively dead; or a nostalgia for an earlier, unrecoverable age; or an attempt to return to one such earlier time – the age of faith, or the primitive condition of balance with nature which many of today’s ‘drop-outs’ yearn for – or again, the attempt to create a secondary world of art untrammelled by the work-a-day one. But the active protests have generally envisaged an active reshaping of human life and its natural basis. This has been true not only of the ideologies of the Left, like Marxism and anarchism, but also of those like Fascism which stressed as well the release of pent-up ‘elemental’ forces in man. Fascism in fact tried in a confused way to combine the above ‘Dionysiac’ alternative with this, ‘Promethean’ one.

Because of the importance of this Promethean aspiration, it is worth looking at its most influential formulation, in the theory of the man who was also the greatest of the Young Hegelians.

Many Marxists, and others, would object to an interpretation of Marxism which places it in what I have called the expressivist tradition. Of course, Marxism is more than this. But I do not think we can understand it and its impact if we try to abstract from this dimension.

Certainly few would want to deny that the young Marx is the heir, through Hegel, of the expressivist aspiration. And already in the early 1840s this is married with the thrust of the radical Enlightenment to produce the peculiarly powerful Marxist synthesis.

The young Marx is heir of the radical Enlightenment first in his notion that man comes to shape nature and eventually society to his purposes. He is its heir second in his critique of the inhumanity of the present order. The Enlightenment gave rise to a new kind of indignant protest against the injustices of the world. Having demolished the older visions of cosmic order and exposed them as at best illusion, and perhaps even sham, it left all the differentiations of the old society, all its special burdens and disciplines, without justification. It is one thing to bear one’s lot as a peasant if it is one’s appointed place in the hierarchy of things as ordered by God and nature. But if the very idea of society as the embodiment of such a cosmic order is swept aside, if society is rather the common instrument of men who must live under the same political roof to pursue happiness, then the burdens and deprivations of this station are a savage imposition, against reason and justice, maintained only by knavery and lies. They would cry to heaven – if heaven still existed – for redress and even vengeance. The Enlightenment thus provoked a new consciousness of inhumanity, of gratuitous and unnecessary suffering, and an urgent determination to combat it. For if man is only a subject of desires who aims at their fulfilment (i.e., happiness), then nothing in heaven or earth compensates for the loss of this happiness. Unrequited deprivation is inconsolable, absolute loss.

Marx takes up this radical critique of inhumanity. But the principal justifying myth which he denounces as the alibi for exploitation and oppression is not the old religion but the new atomistic, utilitarian Enlightenment philosophy itself, principally as reflected in the theories of the classical economists. Indeed, orthodox religion comes off rather lightly in comparison. For it is ‘the sentiment of a heartless world’,7 the flowers on man’s chains, an almost indispensable consolation for men’s suffering in an unjust world – an injustice which in the present phase of history is directly propped up by the bourgeois philosophy of utility.

But the tremendous power of Marx’s theory comes from his joining this thrust of the radical Enlightenment to the expressivist tradition. In the theory as we have it in the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, which remained unpublished in Marx’s lifetime, the transformation of nature is also a self-transformation. Man in making over his natural environment is reshaping his own ‘inorganic body’. He suffers alienation because at first under class society his work and its product, transformed nature – which properly belong to him in the strong sense that they are part of him, his expression – escape from him and become an alien reality, with a dynamic of their own which resists and opposes him. This notion of alienation thus belongs intrinsically to an expressivist structure of thought. Man’s work and its product, the man-made environment, is his expression, and hence its loss is not just deprivation, but self-diremption; and its recovery is not just the means to happiness but regaining wholeness and freedom. For man’s production is his ‘self-creation’ (Selbsterzeugung).

Hence in his own way Marx takes up a common theme of virtually all expressivist critics of modern civilization, and denounces a society which makes possession the central human goal at the expense of expression. The drive for possession itself belongs to the alienated world where man’s human powers are so detached from him that they can be transferred and circulate as property, a poor, distorted substitute for genuine recovery. ‘Private property has made us so stupid and partial that an object is only ours when we have it, when it exists for us as capital, or when it is...utilized in some way.’8

This potent combination of the radical Enlightenment and expressivism comes from a transposition of Hegel’s synthesis from Geist on to man. In Hegel’s point of origin, as it were, the Idea goes out into nature and at first is lost there. That is, it has not yet an adequate expression, and hence there is division and separation within this world, and between the world and Spirit which cannot recognize itself. The development of an adequate embodiment, and hence the return of Spirit to itself is the work of history.

Now for Geist read man, not man as an individual, but as a ‘generic essence’ (Gattungswesen). At his point of origin man is a natural being, for Marx. He exists in nature and only continues through a constant process of interchange with nature. At first this natural matrix in which he is set does not express him at all. But because man unlike the beast can produce universally and consciously, this interchange with nature does not just renew the cycle but transforms it as well. Man makes over nature into an expression of himself, and in the process properly becomes man. Marx speaks of this self-creation of man through the fashioning of an adequate external expression as the ‘objectification [Vergegenständlichung] of man’s species life’.9

But the first attempts at a man-made world, carried out under the pressure of need, introduce division. Men can only achieve a higher type of interchange with nature, or mode of production, by reordering their social relations, and in the conditions of backwardness and indigence which prevail at the beginning, this means that some men must take command over, and hence exploit others. By a cruel irony, the first step towards a higher life, the true realization of man, takes men out of the paradise of primitive communism to the pain and cruelty of class society. We are forcefully reminded of Hegel’s interpretation of the myth of the Fall. It is precisely man’s primitive affirmation of himself as a subject, or spiritual being, which in the early condition of raw particularity cuts him off from the universal, and starts him on the long process of formation which will eventually make of him an adequate vehicle of Spirit.

But divided men cannot achieve an adequate expression, because the subject of the transformation is not the individual but the ‘species being’, human society set in the matrix of nature. Hence under class society men are not in control of their own expression. It escapes them and takes on a dynamic of its own. They suffer alienation in their lives. And this is matched by an alienated consciousness in which they take this estranged world seriously as though it were really the locus of an alien force; the divine in earlier epochs; or the iron laws of classical economics in the bourgeois epoch. Just as Hegel’s Spirit in the period of unhappy consciousness, generic man does not recognize himself in his own objectification.

But if class division is ultimately forced by indigence, then once men have achieved sufficient mastery over nature, this division can be overcome. Generic man will return to himself in his own embodiment, will enter a realm of freedom, that is, integral expression, one which will belong indivisibly to the whole society, in which man will be reconciled with man. Communism will be the abolition ‘of human self-alienation, and thus the real appropriation of human nature through and for man. It is, therefore, the return of man to himself as a social, i.e., really human, being, a complete and conscious return which assimilates all the wealth of previous development.’10

As an expressive fulfilment, communism will overcome the divisions and oppositions to which human life and thought has been prey.

Communism as a fully developed naturalism is humanism and as a fully developed humanism is naturalism. It is the definitive resolution of the antagonism between man and nature, and between man and man. It is the true solution of the conflict between existence and essence, between freedom and necessity, between individual and species. It is the solution of the riddle of history and knows itself to be this solution.11

In this list we see the Hegelian ambition attained in transposed form, the reconciliation of oppositions; and in particular the opposition between man’s necessary objectification in nature, with which he must be in harmony, and the demands of his freedom which at first pit him in opposition against nature. Marx, too, in his own way unites expressivism to Fichte’s radical freedom. For Marx’s man creates himself. But in Hegel the reconciliation is achieved by a recognition of the embodiment of Spirit which is in large part already there. This recognition requires a transformation in the life form of man who is Spirit’s vehicle in history, to be sure; but since the ultimate goal of this transformation is Spirit’s self-recognition, even the transformed society reposes on a recognition: it requires that men see a larger order and identify with the differentiated structure of society as the reflection of this order.

For Marx on the other hand there is no recognition. The reconciliation is entirely created. Man is one with nature because and to the extent to which he has made it over as his expression. The transformation of human society is not aimed at an eventual recognition, of a larger order but ultimately at the subjugation of nature to a design freely created by man.

The well-known short-hand formula differentiating the two thinkers, that Hegel speaks of contemplating the real while Marx wants to change it, is grounded ultimately in their different ontologies. Since for Hegel the subject is Geist, the Spirit of all, reconciliation must come through recognition, since a transformation of the whole universe is without sense. Marx’s reconciliation on the other hand must come through transformation, because his subject is generic man; and man, unlike God, cannot recognize himself in nature until he has put himself there through work. Marx’s reconciliation will, of course, always be incomplete; it never extends beyond the (always receding) frontier of untransformed nature, But this is the price of his Promethean notion of self-creation.

Once one has made this transposition from Geist to man, then Hegel’s whole differentiated structure must appear just like those of the ancien regime, as oppression and injustice masquerading as divine order. Hence Marx while acknowledging his debt to Hegel naturally released all the indignation of the radical Enlightenment at his conception of the state. The Hegelian synthesis is denounced as one achieved in thought only, masking the effective diremption of the real. In the polemic Marx inevitably distorted Hegel, speaking at times as though he was somehow concerned with ‘abstract thought’ alone, and not also the protagonist of another kind of praxis. But the debt is undeniable and comes through Marx’s text even when he is not engaged in acknowledging it. In order to reconcile radical freedom and nature, Hegel developed his notion that radical freedom, as Spirit, was at the foundation of everything. At base everything is an emanation of freedom. It only remained to transpose this immensely activist conception onto man to generate the most powerful revolutionary doctrine.

Many commentators who would agree with this interpretation of early Marx, hold that his mature thought was quite different and that he jettisoned the Hegelian and expressivist formulations of the early 1840s in favour of a hard-nosed science of capitalist society which expounds the iron laws of its inner development and eventual demise. That Marx looked on Capital as a work of science, and that the term ‘science’ came to have for him very much the sense that it had for the later nineteenth century in general, seems to me correct. So that we might look at Capital as one of those great works of mature science, like Darwin’s evolution theory, or later Freud’s psychoanalysis, which incorporate the insights of the earlier Romantic period. But that this involved in Marx’s view taking back anything of the position he held in 1844–7 seems to me a quite unwarranted conclusion. The position I outlined above is drawn from the Paris Manuscripts of 1844, complemented with a few details from the Manifesto. I see no evidence at all that Marx went back on this position in any essential respect, or felt that he needed to.

The conflict between the ‘scientific’ stance of mature Marx and his expressivist transposition of Hegel is in the mind of later commentators, and in this they are probably more clairvoyant than Marx. But it is an unjustified projection to attribute this sense of incompatibility to Marx himself. The fact is that from the beginning, his position was a synthesis between the radical Enlightenment, which sees man as capable of objectifying nature and society in science in order to master it, and the expressivist aspiration to wholeness. This is what he meant in speaking of communism as the union of humanism and naturalism. Expressive fulfilment comes when man (generic man) dominates nature and can impress his free design on it. But at the same time he dominates nature by objectifying it in scientific practice. Under communism men freely shape and alter whatever social arrangements exist. They treat them as instruments. But at the same time this collective shaping of their social existence is their self-expression. In this vision, objectification of nature and expression through it are not incompatible, any more than they are for a sculptor who may make use of engineering technology in constructing his work.

In other words because expressive fulfilment came with the radical freedom to shape nature, it could be combined with the most far-reaching Enlightenment aspiration to dominate the natural and social world through science and technology.

What we see from the young to the mature Marx is not a change of view but a shift of emphasis within what to him must always have appeared as fundamentally the same position. In the climate of the late nineteenth century it was naturally the dimension of ‘scientific socialism’ which tended to predominate. And this orientation was finally sealed by the success of a Marxist revolutionary party in a backward country. For Marxism had to take on the role of a modernizing ideology. Socialism = soviet power + electrification, in Lenin’s famous phrase. Both these goals required that the ruling élite adopt the stance of engineers relative to the at best inert, often refractory social matter they had to deal with. Marxist-Leninism began to be treated as a blue-print in the hands of master builders rather than the consciousness of a new age of freedom.

But official Marxism never simply rejected the expressivist elements of the synthesis. The vision of freedom and of the wholeness of communist man in the official Marxist movement remains in the expressivist tradition, as does much of their critique of bourgeois society. Indeed, this pretense of wholeness is what underlies the totalitarian tendencies of Soviet Marxism, e.g., the demands it makes on art and cultural life, a bureaucratic degeneration of the original claims made on behalf of communist man.

But the Soviet experience has just served to underline the weakness of Marx’s synthesis between expressive fulfilment and scientific objectification. The example of the sculptor certainly shows that man can have both an expressive and an objectifying relation to nature at once. And we can imagine a harmonious group shaping and reshaping its social arrangements in order to meet standards of both efficiency and expression at the same time. But in these cases what men are relying on is an engineering technology or a technique of distributing tasks or something of the sort. They are not using a science of man in society which identifies the determinants of people’s behaviour. For if this is being used then some men are controlling or manipulating others.

In other words a scientific objectification of man which identifies factors determining how men act and feel which are beyond the ken of most and/or the will of all cannot really be the basis of the praxis of a communist society. This is not to say that a science of this kind must be used to ill purpose, or against the cause of freedom. On the contrary, psychoanalysis which claims to be an objectification of this kind, can be used by some men to cure others, and arguably increase their freedom. But the Marxist notion of communist society is that of men deciding together; the decisions represent in a sense a general will, not a concatenation of individual decisions but a genuine common purpose. This does not exclude the marginal use of technologies of human control, say, for the purpose of curing the sick. But the course which the society takes, as a conscious collective decision, cannot be an outcome whose determinants are encompassed by an applied science of this kind.

Now if Capital, or the corpus of Marxist-Leninism, gives us the ‘laws’ governing bourgeois society, and therefore tells us how best to go about abolishing it, the transcending of this society must also mean the suspension of these laws. For the science of bourgeois society shows how men are caught up in structures and a dynamic which they neither understand nor control. This science cannot remain the basis of the revolutionary praxis which supercedes bourgeois society or else this praxis will remain manipulative in contradiction to its central justification.

Thus at the revolutionary border between two eras there must be a jump, as it were, a shift in the laws which apply to society. And this is, indeed, provided for in the theory of alienation described above. The practices of bourgeois society which under alienation follow a dynamic of their own, which Marxist science will trace, are brought back into human control with communism, not to fall under similar external determinants but rather to be genuinely up for decision in a free society.

This transcending of external determinants in favour of free expression makes perfect sense, of course, in the categories of Hegelian philosophy. It is what we see when we ascend the levels of being in Hegel’s philosophy of nature, e.g., from inorganic nature to life, or when we move from alienation back to Sittlichkeit. But it is foreign to the established tradition of science rooted in the Enlightenment. This can allow for man objectifying nature as a domain of neutral instruments on one level while he shapes an expressive object on the other. But it cannot admit of a shifting boundary whereby what is in the realm of objectification and natural law at one stage of history is pulled beyond it into the realm of expression at another. It makes no allowance for its laws being ‘aufgehoben’.

In epistemological terms, this is the ambiguity which the mature Marx never cleared up and probably never saw. This Aufhebungof the laws of society which occurs at critical turning points in history, so that the very terms necessary to explain one period are not applicable at another, this was certainly implicit in the original theory of the young Marx, as it had been in Hegel. It remained essential to the logic of Marx’s notion of revolution and the transition to communism. But it was not part of the model of science which Marx seemed to be appealing to in launching Capital on the world.

Marx never ironed out this wrinkle. No doubt if it had been pointed out to him it would have seemed impossibly precious and ‘philosophical’. His scientific work was cut out by the urgent practical needs of bringing the revolution against capitalism to term. Speculation on the transition to communism was a luxury barely to be indulged in, much less on the epistemological problems raised by the existence of such a transition.

But if one probes deeper, it seems that the problem never arose for Marx because he had an extremely simple-minded view of the transition. The revolution would abolish bourgeois society and hence the laws of its operation, and a united class of proletarians would take over and dispose freely of the economy which it inherited. This kind of leap into untrammelled freedom is not really a dialectical Aufhebung, where the unity of the higher stage is always foreshadowed in the lower, and there is continuity as well as discontinuity between them. But nor is it very realistic. Marx seemed to have been oblivious to the inescapable opacity and indirectness of communication and decision in large bodies of men, the way in which the dynamic of their interaction always partly escapes men, even in small and simple societies, let alone those organized around a large and complex productive system.

The image of the leap, as much as the pressure of more urgent problems, dispensed Marx from having to think about the organization of freedom. It prevented him from seeing communism as a social predicament with its own characteristic limits, less confining and inhuman than those of capitalist society, but limits nonetheless. And thus the problem of the relation of these limits to those of capitalist society could not arise. Rather it is as though the laws of bourgeois society fall away with the abolition of this society the way the technology of carburetors would fall into irrelevance if we got rid of the internal combustion engine.

A shift of this kind can be understood by the most hard-boiled positivist, and it is some such conception which makes it appear that the Aufhebung of bourgeois society towards which Capital points can fit within the classical framework of science. But this compatibility with mainstream science is purchased by a wildly unrealistic notion of the transition as a leap into untrammelled freedom, which simply sets aside the old restraints.

The Marxian synthesis between Enlightenment science and expressive fulfilment is in the end not viable. To set out what is involved in a dialectical transition, to portray the relation between the ‘laws ’ of society at one phase and those at a later phase, to give the social articulation of increased freedom, this would take us well beyond the confines of Enlightenment science. We would have to map the transition from a stage in which men’s actions are governed by external laws, that is, follow regularities which are not desired or adequately conceived by anyone, to a stage in which they are limited by a situation which they (partially) understand and which orients their choices. But this kind of transition takes us beyond the boundaries of classical science. The step from a determination through external law to direction by a meaningful situation can be more readily accounted for in the categories of Hegel’s dialectical transitions.

On the other hand, to make the transition comprehensible to mainstream science we have to think of it not as a step from blind law to meaningful situation, but as simple sloughing off of restraints. We leave the nature of the subject and his agency in the new social form as an unexplored point of complete spontaneity.

Later commentators have been right to point out the rift between Marx’s expressivism and his scientism. But this is not a difference between the young and the mature Marx. Rather his inability to see this rift was already implicit in his original position, in the transposition onto man of Hegel’s notion of a self-positing Geist. The powers of a Spirit who creates his own embodiment, once attributed to man, yield a conception of freedom as self-creation more radical than any previous one. It opens the heady perspective, once alienation is overcome, of a leap to a free self-activity of generic man limited only by the (ever receding) refractory bounds of unsubdued nature. The Marxian notion of the realm of freedom keeps us from exploring the area in which this rift appears.

But this was not a blind spot peculiar to Marx. It affects the whole communist movement. Just a few months before October 1917, in his State and Revolution, Lenin still expressed an incredibly simple view about the administration of communist society. The Bolshevik Party was thrown into the real history of state power with this simple image of human freedom as the unproblematic administration of things. And Soviet communist society has remained somehow fixated on it; so that it continues to resist the framing of any adequate conception of itself as a social form, even while it came to ‘administer’ men as things on a hitherto unprecedented scale.

The terrible history of Soviet communism has induced independent Marxists to rethink the theory, and this has led many to re-examine the more ‘philosophical’ works of the 1840s. The early Marx has offered a new point of departure for many ‘revisionists’, while these first writings are frowned on by official Communism as immature attempts, not yet entirely freed from Hegelian philosophy. This is not to say that official Marxism has sought to jettison the expressivist elements of the doctrine. Rather they have fought to keep Marx’s unviable synthesis between expressivism and scientism from coming under close scrutiny. The appeal of Bolshevism is made up of the impossible combination of a promise of expressive freedom on one hand, and the possession of ‘scientific socialism’ as an engineering blue-print for history on the other. It is in the interest of the movement to keep this contradiction from being exposed and resolved. When it is resolved, as in the work of Louis Althusser, who has tried to purge Marx of Hegelian notions in the name of a sophisticated form of scientism, the result is neither convincing as exegesis nor attractive as a political vision. The justification of élite rule by the Leninist party, in a supposed scientific objectification of the contradictions of society, does not suffer explicit statement without producing a malaise in the reader who has reflected on contemporary history.

The Bolshevik image of the proletarian party as ‘engineers’ building in conformity with the ‘laws’ of history combines two opposed pictures of the human predicament. It shows us man, on one hand, imposing his will on the course of history, even against odds and refractory matter. This is the ‘heroic’ image. On the other hand dialectical materialism sets out the laws which govern man and history with an iron necessity. These two pictures are not as such incompatible. But they cannot be combined in the way proposed. The laws which are applied by the engineers who impose their will on events cannot be those which hold with an iron necessity, if we mean by this that we can account for what happens by reference to them without invoking any human decisions. A true law of development of history would be one whose antecedents are not manipulable. It could serve us to adjust more harmoniously to the course of events, to smooth transitions, but not to impose our will. It would not be amenable to application by ‘engineers’.

The Bolsheviks in fact imposed their will on events, not only in undertaking the Revolution in 1917, but much more in the drive to collectivize the peasantry after 1928. How much this was against the grain can be measured by the blood spilt, and by the state of Soviet agriculture almost half a century later. And it would seem that Stalin and his colleagues felt pushed by necessity: that either they brought the peasants to heel or the growth of the relatively free peasant economy under NEP would undermine the basis of their power. It was that kind of ‘iron necessity’, a matter of us or them, which indeed had something to do with the economic infrastructure of power, but nothing whatever to do with an inevitable direction of history. On the contrary, it was nip and tuck. The ‘laws of history’, which point to the inevitable triumph of communism, serve in the end as an alibi for a decision imposed on events. There can be regret but no remorse for blood spilt in the inescapable forward march of humanity to a higher civilization.

Marxist-Leninism has thus realized a marriage of incompatibles, a union first of an extreme voluntarism and scientism – the notion that the science of history objectifies society, as physics does nature, as a domain of potential manipulanda – combined then with the most thoroughgoing determinism. The first two are a natural combination for an élite which is imposing a new direction on a refractory mass. But this practice cannot easily be squared with the Marxist perspective of expressive freedom. And so this massive social engineering is presented as the outcome of the laws of history, emerging from the masses as their inescapable will and destiny. There are colossal contradictions in this position: the laws of history cannot be the basis of social engineering and reveal the inevitable trend of events; the mixture of voluntarism and engineering allows no place for the growth of freedom. But the combination has been immensely powerful as a political rallying point in contemporary history.

Marxist revisionists have seen the links between these three terms. They have seen that the image of the revolution as imposed by will and the conception of it as determined by iron necessity paradoxically go together. They have tried to break from both these at once in a new reading of Marxism, by which we can trace the ripening of the conditions of revolution, which nevertheless ‘can be translated into reality only through men’s decisions between alternatives’.12 The rediscovery, with the help of Marx’s early vision, of the bent in things towards a revolutionary transformation is the guarantee against impotent preaching, a pure politics of ‘Sollen’, on one hand, as well as against the attempt to impose communism by force against the grain, on the other. It is the guarantee that the liberation will be the work of the spontaneous activity of large masses of people and not just of a revolutionary élite, that the means used to achieve communism will be in conformity with the end.

At the same time, this bent in things is not an iron necessity, so that the paradox is avoided of a transition to freedom which is not itself mediated by free activity.

The revisionist attempt to rediscover the bent in things which ‘inclines without necessitating’, to use Leibniz’s phrase, is rightly directed back to the formulations of early Marx. But early Marx is not enough. For Marx himself, early and late, held to a terribly unreal notion of freedom in which the opacity, division, indirectness and cross-purposes of social life were quite overcome. It is this picture of situation-less freedom which underlies the unviable synthesis of expressivism and scientism, and which allows Bolshevik voluntarism to masquerade as the realization of freedom. Whereas the bent of revisionism is to recover a notion of free action as in an oriented situation which the agent can either assume or refuse.

Now this freedom without situation is what Hegel called ‘absolute freedom’. It was a conception of freedom which was sterile and empty in his eyes in that it left us with no reason to act in one way rather than another; and it was destructive, since in its emptiness it drives us to tear down any other positive work as a hindrance to freedom. I said above, in Chapter xv, that Hegel in criticizing absolute freedom, while aiming at the French Revolutionaries, was also in a sense criticizing Marx by anticipation, while in another sense Marx as Hegel’s heir in part escapes these strictures. We can now see more clearly how both these judgements are true, and how the early Marx is thus both a good and an insufficient source for the revisionist search for a definition of freedom in situation. Marx escapes Hegel’s strictures because he does not start from the notion of a purely autonomous rational will, as Kant did. On the contrary man is in a cycle of interchange with nature: He does not gain freedom by abstracting from or neutralizing this nature, but by transforming it. And this sets him a very definite task; that of making nature over on one hand, and of overcoming the divisions and alienation which arise in the early stages of this transformation on the other. Man is thus in a situation, he is part of a larger order of things which sets him a task. In this way Marx’s theory is like Hegel’s, of which it is the transposition, as we have seen.

From the beginning man has to create the conditions of freedom. And this is what has given their direction to Marxist societies. They have to build socialism, develop the pre-conditions of communism. But once the conditions are realized, the Marxist notion of freedom is of no further help. It is not a matter of providing a detailed blue-print for a free society, a demand which has often rightly been rejected as contradictory. Rather it is that the overcoming of all alienation and division leaves man without a situation, and at this stage, the end of ‘pre-history’, the Hegelian point about the emptiness of absolute freedom begins to apply.

If it is absurd to ask for a blue-print of communist society, it is not at all malapropos to ask in general terms how we envisage men’s situation will have changed, what constraints, divisions, tensions, dilemmas, struggles and estrangements will replace those we know today. Not only does classical Marxism have no answer to this; it implies that the answer is ‘none’: that our only situation will be that of generic man, harmoniously united, in contest with nature. But this predicament is not only unbelievable, but arguably unliveable. It would be an utterly empty freedom.

This situationless notion of freedom has been very destructive. Not quite in the way Hegel predicted. For Marxist societies have been very concerned with construction, building the foundations of socialism. But Marx’s variant of ‘absolute freedom ‘is at the base of Bolshevik voluntarism which, strong with the final justification of history, has crushed all obstacles in its path with extraordinary ruthlessness, and has spawned again that Terror which Hegel described with uncanny insight.

3

We have looked at Marx’s Promethean expressivism, because this is the most influential formulation of a widespread modern protest against the course of our civilization. The idea of overcoming the injustice and expressive deadness of our world at one stroke by recovering control and radically reshaping it according to a freely chosen design exercises a profound attraction well beyond the boundaries of official Marxism. We find it almost everywhere among the protest and liberation movements of our day.

And in its very ubiquity, we have the beginnings of an answer to our question above about the relevance of Hegelian philosophy. To the extent that these aspirations to radical freedom are influenced by Marx, they descend also from Hegel. But what is much more important, they encounter the same dilemma, which emerged from our discussion of Marxism. They face the same emptiness, the same temptation to the forceful imposition of their solution on an unyielding world, the same inability to define a human situation once the present imperfect one is swept away. The rebels of May 1968 were in this respect no different from the calloused commissars they so despised. The difference was that the latter had a programme, based on the disciplined building of the ‘conditions’ of socialism, while the former insisted quite rightly that the building had gone on long enough and it was time to enter the realm of freedom.

But this whole tradition, whether Marxist, anarchist, situationist, or whatever, offers no idea whatever of what the society of freedom should look like beyond the empty formulae, that it should be endlessly creative, have no divisions, whether between men, or within them, or between levels of existence (play is one with work, love is one with politics, art is one with life), involve no coercion, no representation, etc. All that is done in these negative characterizations is to think away the entire human situation. Small wonder then, that this freedom has no content.

In the heat of the struggle, behind the barricades, there is a real liberation of expression, a field for creative action, the breaking down of barriers, a real participatory democracy. But of course this arises in a very real situation, one of breach with the ongoing routines and structures, and of combat against the ‘forces of order’. But in the image of the revolution triumphant, this situation too, along with all others, is thought away.

It is as though the rebels of May 1968 were sent by Providence out of a sense of irony to confront old revolutionaries with the logic of their position. This dilemma of absolute freedom is one that Hegel thought about, and that is one of the reasons why contemporaries will continually return to examine him. He is at the origin of an important modern cast of thought, whose basic dilemma he grasped more profoundly than most of his successors.

But this problem, which we have spoken of as that of relating freedom to a situation, affects more than the Marxist or even revolutionary tradition. It is a problem for all forms of modern expressivism, and in a sense also for the whole modern conception of subjectivity.

This modern notion of subjectivity has spawned a number of conceptions of freedom which see it as something men win through to by setting aside obstacles or breaking loose from external impediments, ties or entanglements. To be free is to be untrammelled, to depend in one’s action only on oneself. Moreover this conception of freedom has not been a mere footnote, but one of the central ideas by which the modern notion of the subject has been defined, as is evident in the fact that freedom is one of the values most appealed to in modern times. At the very outset, the new identity as self-defining subject was won by breaking free of the larger matrix of a cosmic order and its claims.

This type of conception of freedom defines it as self-dependence, to coin a general description. It contrasts with earlier (and some later) conceptions which define freedom in terms of order or right relation. For instance, the notion of freedom implicit in Aristotle relates it to harmony, equilibrium, the mean, as against the disordered hegemony of the extremes.

This is in a sense a negative conception of freedom. But it is not equivalent to ‘negative freedom’ as this is usually identified.13 Negative freedom usually means freedom defined as independent from external interference, whereas ‘positive’ conceptions define it rather as realized in action which comes from or expresses the true self. But even positive conceptions in modern times have been notions of self-dependence. Freedom is won by breaking the hold of the lower self or nature so that I may obey only my (true) self. Thus Kant, whose theory is at the origin of many positive notions of freedom, defines freedom as obeying a law made by the rational self, in contrast to dependence on the will of others, external authority, or nature.

This cast of thought, which sees freedom as self-dependence, has thus been a common basis underlying the revolutionary developments in the modern notion of freedom. It is common to the original ‘negative’ conception of classical liberalism from Locke to Bentham, to the Rousseauian conception of freedom as obeying only oneself, to the Kantian notion of autonomy, and its successors right up to the Marxian idea of the realm of freedom, where man having overcome all alienation and dominated the natural matrix in which he is set once more determines his destiny out of himself – though the subject of this freedom is here generic, not individual man.

But this basic idea has in fact undergone development. Its first empiricist or naturalistic versions saw the goals of the self as given by nature – as desires or drives. Later variants wanted to go beyond the given altogether. The watershed in this respect is perhaps Kant. As transposed by Hegel and again by Marx, the Kantian aspiration to radical autonomy turns into the idea that human nature is not simply a given, but is to be made over. To be integrally free man must reshape his own nature.

Now it is arguably this general conception itself, equating freedom and self-dependence, which generates the dilemma we examined above in connection with Marxism. For it is defined in such a way that complete freedom would mean the abolition of all situation, that is, a predicament which sets us a certain task or calls for a certain response from us if we are to be free. The only kind of situation which this view can recognize is one defined by the obstacles to untrammelled action which have to be conquered or set aside – external oppression, inauthentic aspirations imposed by society, alienation, natural limits. This kind of situation calls for ‘liberation’, a word which reappears today in every conceivable context. But liberation is understood as a process which results in freedom. On this view, there is no situation such that the response it calls for would be free action at its fullest extent as against just clearing the way to such action. Full freedom would be situationless.

And by the same token, empty. Complete freedom would be a void in which nothing would be worth doing, nothing would deserve to count for anything. The self which has arrived at freedom by setting aside all external obstacles and impingements is characterless, and hence without defined purpose, however much this is hidden by such seemingly positive terms as ‘rationality’ or ‘creativity’. These are ultimately quite indeterminate as criteria for human action or mode of life. They cannot specify any content to our action outside of a situation which sets goals for us, which thus imparts a shape to rationality and provides an inspiration for creativity.

We might hope to fill this void by returning to the earlier variants of the modern conception of freedom as self-dependence in which our goals are supposedly given by nature. Freedom would then be the unchecked fulfilment of desire, and the shape of desire would be a given. But this is a very inadequate conception of freedom. For if free activity cannot be defined in opposition to our nature and situation, on pain of vacuity, it cannot simply be identified with following our strongest, or most persistent, or most all-embracing desire either. For that would make it impossible to say that our freedom was ever thwarted by our own compulsions, fears, obsessions; or to say that freedom widens with heightened awareness or awakened aspirations. And these are not only things that we feel inclined to say in our pre-philosophical reflections about life; they are essential to an expressivist perspective which is concerned to achieve full self-expression beyond the distortions of in-authentic desire and confined aspiration. We have to be able to distinguish compulsions, fears, addictions from those of our aspirations which we endorse with our whole soul, not just by some quantitative criterion, but in a way which shows these latter to be more authentically ours. That is what the radical conceptions of freedom as self-dependence have tried to do in seeing our authentic aspirations as chosen by us, as against simply given. But it is just this radical notion of freedom which runs into the dilemma of vacuity.

Hegel laid bare the emptiness of the free self and the pure rational will, in his critique of Kant’s morality and the politics of absolute freedom. And he hoped to overcome this emptiness, to give man a situation, without abandoning the notion of rational will. This was to be done by showing man to be the vehicle of a cosmic reason, which generated its articulations out of itself.

But once this solution in terms of cosmic spirit became untenable, for the reasons we examined above, the dilemma recurs, and indeed all the more pressingly in that the notion of freedom has been intensified, made at once more urgent and more all-embracing in its passage through German Idealism and its materialist transposition in Marx.

One stream of expressivism turned to an idea of fulfilment as the release of the instinctual or elemental depths beyond the ordered limits of conscious rationality. But this in the end puts paid altogether to the ideal of freedom in either modern or ancient sense. This ‘elemental’ notion of freedom has no place for self-possession, hence for a specifically human sense of freedom.

Schopenhauer’s philosophy was an important stage on the road towards this ‘Dionysiac’ expressivism. But his own theory was in a sense its pessimistic inversion. Schopenhauer’s concept of the ‘will’ and of the body as its ‘objectification’ derive from the expressivist stream of thought, but there is no idea of fulfilment here. On the contrary, the elemental force of the will brings man only suffering and degradation. The only hope is in release from the will which Schopenhauer sees in an end of all attachment to earthly things, after the model of Upanishadic and Buddhist thought.

Schopenhauer’s vision provides a model for a deeply pessimistic view of human freedom, based on the sense that man’s instinctual nature is other than and uncombinable with rational freedom, and at the same time unconquerable. It is this latter point which differentiates Schopenhauer from his mentor, Kant.

This conception of man can lead to despair about freedom understood as self-dependence, either because the untrammelled ‘freedom’ of the instinctual self seems worthless if not loathsome, or because the self defined in opposition to the instinctual seems relatively powerless.

And ‘despair’ is the term Kierkegaard used in his Sickness unto Death for this inability to accept oneself. Kierkegaard makes this the point of exit, as it were, from which he steps altogether outside the tradition of freedom as self-dependence. Despair can only be overcome by relating oneself to the external ‘Power which constituted the whole relation’ (sc. of the self to the self),14 i.e., God.

But the affirmation of freedom leads to a deeper dilemma, and it was Nietzsche who pushed this to its most uncompromising expression. If the radical freedom of self-dependence is ultimately empty, then it risks ending in nihilism, that is, self-affirmation through the rejection of all ‘values’. One after the other, the authoritative horizons of life, Christian and humanist, are cast off as shackles on the will. Only the will to power remains. The power and impact of Nietzsche’s work come from his fierce espousal of this destructive movement which he pushes to the limit.

And yet he also seems to have held that the will to power of self-defining man would be disastrous. Man as a purely self-dependent will to power must be ‘overcome’, to use Zarathustra’s expression. Nietzsche had an idea of this reconciliation between man’s will and the course of the world in his vision of eternal recurrence, which is not easy to follow. But his idea seems to have been that pure self-affirmation must lead to an impasse, that it has at some point to link up with a deep endorsement of the course of things. ‘To redeem the men of the past and to change each “Thus it was” into a “Thus I would have it” – this alone I call redemption.’15

The modern notion of freedom is thus under threat from two sides. On one hand, there is despair about the realization of freedom, even doubt whether the aspiration to freedom makes any sense, in face of the irrational and elemental in man. On the other, the ultimate emptiness of self-dependent freedom seems to lead to nihilism. Thus much philosophical thought in the last century has been engaged with this problem; how to go beyond a notion of the self as the subject of a self-dependent will and bring to light its insertion in nature, our own and that which surrounds us, or in other terms, how to situate freedom?

This means to recover a conception of free activity which sees it was a response called for by a situation which is ours in virtue of our condition as natural and social beings, or in virtue of some inescapable vocation or purpose. What is common to all the varied notions of situated freedom is that they see free activity as grounded in the acceptance of our defining situation. The struggle to be free – against limitations, oppression, distortions of inner and outer origin – is powered by an affirmation of this defining situation as ours. This cannot be seen as a set of limits to be overcome, or a mere occasion to carry out some freely chosen project, which is all that a situation can be within the conception of freedom as self-dependence.

In this search for a conception of situated freedom, reductive mechanistic theories of human thought and behaviour are of no avail. They do indeed place free activity within nature, since it is one possible output of a natural system. But they do this at the cost of returning to the definition of freedom as the unchecked fulfilment of desire, and we have seen that this is inadequate, that it does not allow us to make certain essential distinctions. The notion of a freedom rooted in our nature, and yet which can be frustrated by our own desires or our limited aspirations requires a more articulated, many-levelled theory of human motivation. It is very doubtful whether any theory which recognizes only efficient causation can do justice to it. We need the notion of a bent in our situation which we can either endorse or reject, re-interpret or distort. This not only must be distinguished from what we ordinarily call desire. But it is hard to see how a bent of this kind could be accounted for in mechanistic terms, not to speak of its relation to our desires.

Reductive theories claim to suppress the problem of relating freedom to nature. But in fact they cannot escape it. It returns, this time unadmitted, in that the scientific objectification of human nature presupposes a subject of science whose activity and judgments about truth and depth of explanation cannot be accounted for in the reductive theory. He remains the angelic observer outside the objectified stream of life.

The fact that this problem of situating freedom has become more salient is probably not unrelated to the political and social developments mentioned in the first section. In a smoothly running modern society, in which the exploitation of nature and the organization of society seem designed for the utility of individuals, it is quite natural for men to feel at home in a vision of themselves as autonomous subjects engaged in effecting their freely-chosen desires and purposes. In a scientific perspective, they may indeed see themselves as moved by drives, and their behaviour as part of a deterministic causal system. But although these two perspectives are probably incompatible, neither of them gives rise to serious question about freedom or about its relation to nature. The first is that of the subject which objectifies nature, who takes his own freedom for granted, while his goals are determined by the requirement that he play his part in the large productive enterprise in the search for individual happiness. On the second perspective, the problem of relating freedom and nature is suppressed from the outset, as we have just seen. Freedom is following the course of desire, itself determined by nature within us and without. And although these desires are not autonomous in the Kantian sense, they are clear and unambiguous and quite clearly mine as long as I identify with my own nature.16

But when this society is challenged and its equilibrium lost, when the more radical expressivist aspirations to total freedom gain a wide hearing, when social and individual life seem to be the prey of irrational forces – either because the social mechanisms fail to function according to ‘rational’ prescription (for instance, in the Depression), or because desires and aspirations come to the fore which threaten the very framework of instrumentally rational collaborative action (e.g., chauvinisms, racism, war fevers) – then the notion of the autonomous self cannot but come into question. The demand for absolute freedom raises the dilemma of self-dependence in its acutest form. And the renewed saliency of irrational and destructive cravings makes us question the very idea of autonomy, and undermines the idea of an unambiguous attribution of desire, or alternatively of our unambiguous identification with the nature in us which desires. The course of modern history has made the perspective of Schopenhauer, as vehicled to us by Freud and others, very familiar and plausible.

The short history of the Phenomenological movement strikingly illustrates the turn in philosophy towards the attempt to situate subjectivity. Husserl starts towards the turn of the century defending the autonomy of the rational subject against psychologism, the reduction of logic to psychology. He then goes on to explore the structures of subjectivity. He still, even in the late 1920s with, for instance, the Cartesian Meditations, sees himself as in a sense the heir of Descartes. His last work, however, turns to deal with the ‘life-world’, the insertion of our subjectivity in our situation as natural, embodied beings. That is what is taken up and developed by his successors, e.g., Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty. Finally what survives are the insights about embodied thought; phenomenology itself, as a ‘method’ of ‘pure description’ of subjectivity, disappears from the scene.

One can perhaps see parallel developments in anglo-saxon philosophy, where in recent decades there has been a growing interest in tracing the conceptual connections between thoughts, feelings, intentions, etc. and their bodily expressions and antecedents.

But perhaps the most important development of twentieth-century philosophy is the focus on theories of meaning and the philosophy of language. I believe that this, too, reflects in part the desire to define a notion of subjectivity in situation, that this is one of the motivations for this new departure.

Of course, language as the vehicle of conscious, discursive thought can be studied by philosophy in all sorts of intentions. But it is a characteristic of twentieth-century discussions of language that meaning itself has been a problem, that is, they have focussed on the question; what is it for words, or language, or other signs, to have meaning?

As long as our activity as subjects, the fact that we perceive and think about the world, seems clear and unproblematic, as long as its relation to the rest of what we do and feel as living beings seems unpuzzling, the function of language also appears straightforward. Words refer to things, and we use them to think about things with. Words have meaning by pointing to things in the world, or in our thought. The unproblematic nature of the referring relation reflects the lack of question about subjectivity, about the fact that things appear for us as objects of the kind of explicit awareness in which we apply names and descriptions to them.

But our conceptions of language changes when this fact of explicit consciousness no longer seems something we can take for granted, seems rather an achievement and a remarkable one. For this achievement is only possible through language, which is its vehicle; and hence language becomes a relevant object of study not just as an assemblage of terms by which we designate things, but also as that by which there is such an activity as designating in the first place, as what underpins that field of explicit awareness within which it is possible to pick things out and fix them by words. In this perspective meaning is not simply a property which pertains to each word individually, but a fact about the activity of discourse as a whole which is in a sense prior to the individual terms.

Once we see language as the vehicle of a certain mode of consciousness, which we achieve through speech, then a whole host of questions can arise concerning its relation to other modes of awareness, to other functions and activities of life, in short its ‘Sitz im Leben’. It ceases to be taken for granted that what we are mainly doing in language is designating and describing things, that this is the paradigm linguistic activity in relation to which all others are to be explained. On the contrary, other activities which also require linguistic consciousness to be carried through – invoking some power, performing a rite, bringing about certain states of affairs, clarifying our vision, establishing a sphere of communication – may be equally if not more primitive. That is, it may be that the meaning of certain terms and expressions can only be made clear if we understand them as occurring in the context of these activities. In these cases meaning can only be explicited by situating language in the matrix of our concerns, practices and activities, in short by relating it to our ‘form of life’.

And if linguistic consciousness is an achievement to which we win through from less explicit modes, and if moreover the activities we engage in through language and symbols are various, then there are many types and levels of awareness of the world which can be embodied in words or signs. Men of any given culture may function on a number of such levels, e.g., in art, conversation, ritual, self-revelation, scientific study; and over history new conceptualizations and new modes of awareness emerge. It may be that our thought on any one level can only be understood by its relation to the other levels; in particular our ‘higher’, more explicit awareness may always repose on a background of the implicit and the unreflected.

We can easily recognize here some theses of contemporary philosophy. The later Wittgenstein has made commonplaces of the arguments for the priority of language over individual words in his discussion of the claims of ostensive definition. And he shows how the explication of meaning must end in a reference to forms of life. Polanyi has portrayed our explicit thought as an achievement, always surrounded by a horizon of the implicit, of subsidiary awareness. Heidegger speaks of linguistic consciousness as ‘disclosure’, as creating a field of awareness in which things can appear, and of our consciousness of things as shaped by our ‘concern’. More recently, ‘structuralist’ thinkers have explored language as a ‘grid’ embodying a certain awareness of the world.

These ways of understanding linguistic thought situate this thought in ‘nature’, that is, in the life of man as an embodied, social being, while avoiding a reductive account of language and meaning through a mechanistic causal theory – like, e.g., behaviourism or psychologism – which suppresses all distinctions between different modes of awareness by making them unstatable. They go beyond the alternative between reductive, mechanistic theories and ‘angelic’ conceptions of subjectivity as disembodied thought. They open a view of subjectivity in situation. This is, of course, part of the philosophical intention of writers like Polanyi, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and other ‘continental’ writers. But the connection has also come to the fore in the anglo-saxon world, since contemporary writers who have explored the theme of action and feeling as belonging to embodied agents have drawn heavily on the later writings of Wittgenstein.

What relation has Hegel’s philosophy to this contemporary turn? Fundamental to Hegel’s theory, as we saw, was the principle of embodiment. Subjectivity was necessarily situated in life, in nature, and in a setting of social practices and institutions. Hegel, as we examined in the Part V, saw language and symbols as vehicles of awareness,17 and he saw different vehicles corresponding to different levels, in the various stages of art, religion and philosophy.

In a sense, Hegel can be placed in the line of development which leads up to the contemporary ways of understanding language. Its point of origin in modern thought is perhaps Herder, who made a radical shift of the kind described above. He ceased to take the relation of referring for granted whereby certain signs become associated with certain objects18 and focussed on the fact that there were signs at all, on linguistic consciousness, as a remarkable human power that we are very far from adequately understanding. Language is no longer just an assemblage of signs, but the vehicle of this consciousness. As mentioned in Chapter I, Herder’s reaction to Condillac and the established theory of language is reminiscent at certain points of the later Wittgenstein. By seeing language as an activity expressive of a certain consciousness, Herder situates it in the life-form of the subject, and hence develops the notion of different languages as expressive each of a vision peculiar to the community which speaks it.

This insight was developed in the Romantic period and by thinkers influenced by the expressivist current of thought, e.g., von Humboldt. But it seems to have gone somewhat into abeyance in the latter half of the nineteenth century, in the period in which the insights of Romanticism were being reincorporated into an expanded mechanistic science. The concern and puzzlement about meaning return towards the end of the century – through the new reflections on the sciences of man which start with Dilthey and make ‘verstehen’ their goal; as an inevitable by-product of Freud’s revolutionary extensions of the notion of meaning; under the impact of the epistemological questions posed by new developments in physics and which were explored by Mach and his successors in Vienna.

Hegel can be placed in this line of descent, and yet in a sense he also departed from it, may even bear part of the responsibility for the hiatus of the later part of the century. This for the reason examined in Chapter XVII. The Herderian approach to language which has recurred in contemporary philosophy sees speech as the activity by which we gain a kind of explicit, self-aware consciousness of things which as such is always related to an unreflective experience which precedes it and which it illuminates and hence transforms. This is the dimension of language which I called ‘disclosure’ in Chapter xvn, which involves its own kind of fidelity to extra-linguistic experience. The view of language, on the other hand, which sees it as a set of signs, of which the most important are referential, makes the other dimension, the descriptive, the important, indeed the only relevant one.

Now Hegel unquestionably belongs to the first school. He sees the different ‘languages’, of art, religion and discursive thought as expressing an awareness of the Absolute which is not at first descriptive at all (in art) and which is never simply descriptive, since the revelation in religion and philosophy completes the realization of the Absolute and does not simply portray it. But nevertheless, his thesis that the Absolute must finally come to complete, explicit clarity in conceptual statement gives the primacy in the end to the descriptive dimension. Our explicit consciousness is no longer surrounded by a horizon of the implicit, of unreflected life and experience, which it is trying to render faithfully but which can never be fully, adequately, definitively brought to light. On the contrary, in the Hegelian synthesis the unclear consciousness of the beginning is itself made part of the chain of conceptual necessity. The unclear and inarticulate, just as the external and contingent, is itself shown to have a necessary existence. The approximate and incompletely formed is itself derived in exact, articulate concepts.

What makes possible this final victory of conceptual clarity is of course Hegel’s ontology, the thesis that what we ultimately discover at the basis of everything is the Idea, conceptual necessity itself. Conceptual thought is not trying to render a reality whose foundations can never be definitively identified, nor is it the thought of a subject whose deeper instincts, cravings and aspirations can never be fully fathomed. On the contrary, at the root of reality, as in the depths of himself, the subject ultimately finds clear, conceptual necessity.

But once this ontology fades from view, what remains is the notion that descriptive conceptual thought is omnicompetent and ultimately self-sufficient, that is, that it does not in the end need to rely on a background of implicit understanding. And in this Hegel seems to emerge as the ally of those in the central tradition of modern subjectivity who take the existence of descriptive discourse quite unproblematically for granted. For they hold that the descriptive dimension alone has relevance for scientific or informative discourse, that the relation of explicit thought to unreflected experience has nothing to do with meaning, but can only be a problem for (a mechanistic, objectifying) psychology. Whereas those who are trying to relate linguistic consciousness to its matrix in unreflective life – once Hegel’s logo-ontology is set aside – must necessarily see explicit thought as rooted in an implicit sense of the situation which can never be fully explored.

In other words, the new line taken by Herder, against the grain of the Enlightenment, opens the problems of the relation of our linguistic consciousness to deeper, unreflective levels of experience. Hegel in claiming the complete self-clarity of Geist in effect proposes to close this question as definitively solved. But as his solution fades, his far-reaching claims on behalf of conceptual thought separate him from Herder’s heirs in our day, for whom the unreflective experience of our situation can never be fully explicited, and seem to align him with those for whom the problem should never have been posed.

4

Hegel’s double relation to this tradition which descends from Herder, both an essential link in it, and yet at odds with it, illustrates his relevance for modern philosophy. As I said at the outset, his conclusions are dead, and yet the course of his philosophical reflection is very much to the point. We can now see more clearly why.

Hegel’s philosophy is an important step in the development of the modern notion of freedom. He helped to develop a conception of freedom as total self-creation, which indeed was attributable in his philosophy only to cosmic spirit, but which only needed to be transposed on to man to push the conception of freedom as self-dependence to its ultimate dilemma. He thus had an important part in the intensification of the conflict around the modern notion of freedom. For absolute freedom has acquired an unprecedented impact on political life and aspirations through the work of Marx and his successors, whose debt to Hegel needs no underlining. And one of the sources of Nietzsche’s thought, which drew the nihilist consequences of this idea, was the young Hegelian revolt of the 1840s.

At the same time Hegel was one of the profoundest critics of this notion of freedom as self-dependence. He laid bare its emptiness and its potential destructiveness with a truly remarkable insight and prescience. He has paradoxically helped both to bring this modern doctrine to its most extreme expression and to show the dilemma in which it involves us.

But most important of all, the contemporary attempt to go beyond this dilemma, to situate subjectivity by relating it to our life as embodied and social beings, without reducing it to a function of objectified nature, constantly refers us back to Hegel. In a sense, the modern search for a situated subjectivity is the heir of that central aspiration of the Romantic period which Hegel thought to answer definitively – how to unite radical autonomy with the fullness of expressive unity with nature.19 Because nature cannot be for us what it was for that age, an expression of spiritual powers, the syntheses of the time can no longer command our allegiance.

But the problem which concerned that generation, the opposition they attempted to reconcile, continues in different forms to our day. It seems ineradicable from modern civilization, which as heir to the Enlightenment constandy re-awakens expressivist protest, and along with this, the claims of absolute freedom. The very urgency with which these claims are pressed makes the search for a situated subjectivity all the more vital. And the need grows more acute today under the impact of an ecological crisis which is being increasingly dramatized in the public consciousness. The fact that we are still trying to reconcile freedom and nature makes us still at home in the Romantic period. They speak to us, however bizarre their doctrines may appear to contemporary eyes.20

And in so far as this search for a situated subjectivity takes philosophical form, Hegel’s thought will be one of its indispensable points of reference. For although his ontological vision is not ours – indeed seems to deny the very problem as we now understand it – Hegel’s writings provide one of the most profound and far-reaching attempts to work out a vision of embodied subjectivity, of thought and freedom emerging from the stream of life, finding expression in the forms of social existence, and discovering themselves in relation to nature and history. If the philosophical attempt to situate freedom is the attempt to gain a conception of man in which free action is the response to what we are – or to a call which comes to us, from nature alone or a God who is also beyond nature (the debate will never cease) – then it will always recur behind Hegel’s conclusions to his strenuous and penetrating reflections on embodied spirit.

 

 

1 Letters no. 280 and 281, K. Marx, F. Engels, Werke, Berlin, 1965, v. pp. 32, 500, 503; quoted in E. Weil, Hegel et l’Etat, Paris 1950, pp. 15–16. The editor was Wilhelm Liebknecht. The footnote was appended by him to an article by Engels.

2 London 1915.

3 Even if we do not go along with Merleau-Ponty, Sense and Non-sense, Northwestern U.P., 1964, ‘All the great philosophical ideas of the past century – the philosophies of Marx and Nietzsche, phenomenology, German existentialism, and psychoanalysis – had their beginnings in Hegel’ (63), the scope of Hegel’s influence is beyond doubt considerable.

4 Cf. D. Easton, A Systems Analysis of Political Life, New York, 1965.

5 F. Nietzsche Also Sprach Zarathustra, Zarathustra’s Preface, § 3.

6 Hölderlin, Hyperion, Fischer Edition, Frankfurt, 1962, p. 9.

7 Karl Marx, Early Writings, translated and edited by T. B. Bottomore, London and New York, 1964, pp. 43–4.

8 Op. cit. p. 159.

9 Op. at., p. 128.

10 Op. cit., p. 155.

11 Loc. cit.

12 Georg Lukâcs, as quoted in Istvan Méfiàros, Lukâcs’ Concept of Dialectic, London, Merlin Press, 1972, p. 44.

13 Cf. Isaiah Berlin, ‘Two Concepts of Liberty’ in Berlin: Four Essays on Liberty, O.U.P., 1969.

14 Sickness unto Death, Anchor Edition, New York, 1954, p. 147.

15 ‘Die Verganegnen zu erlösen und alles “Es war” umzuschaffen in ein “So wollte ich es !” – das hieße mir erst Erlösung.’ Also Sprach Zarathustra, Part I, on Redemption.

16 We can see why there is a certain link between the acceptance of reductive mechanistic theories of motivation and satisfaction with the atomistic, utilitarian, manipulative bent of our civilization. As we saw above, these theories are not really capable of coping intellectually with the self-thwarting of freedom through our compulsions or confined aspirations. Thus reductive theories are more likely to gain acceptance where this problem is not salient, i.e., where the desires that men seek to fulfill through society seem normal and spontaneous. Correlatively, expressivist thought, from Rousseau on, has developed the theme of the self-thwarting of freedom.

17 A pithy formulation of this view of language as an embodiment of awareness rather than as assemblage of signs occurs in PhG (496): ‘...die Sprache, – ein Dasein, das unmittelbar selbstbewußte Existenz ist’.

18 Cf. above Chapter I.

19 Thus one of the deep motivations of Heidegger’s thought is to take us beyond the adversary stance of domination and objectification towards nature which he sees implicit in our metaphysical tradition and its off-shoot, technological civilization, and inaugurate (or recover) a mode of existence in which the highest awareness is a way of ‘letting things be’, of disclosure. Heidegger claims to find his position foreshadowed in Hegel’s friend and contemporary, Hölderlin, perhaps the greatest poet of the Romantic generation. (See following note.)

In view of this it is not surprising that Heidegger accords a pivotal position to Hegel. He sees him as the culmination of the tradition of ‘metaphysics’. But he is more than just the paradigm of what Heidegger opposes. Plainly he has drawn a great deal from Hegel, and most notably perhaps the conception of authentic awareness as a return out of forgetfulness and error. (Cf. his discussion of the Introduction to PhG in Hegel’s Concept of Experience, New York, 1970; translation of Chapter m of Holzwege, Frankfurt, 5th Edition 1972.) Hence his substantive philosophical thesis is as inextricably linked with a reading of the history of philosophy as is Hegel’s. But Heidegger’s reading is systematically different from Hegel’s. For he rejects the Hegelian culmination in the total self-clarity of subjectivity. He sees in this rather an extreme, indeed insurpassable expression of the metaphysical stance of objectification.

20 In the end, of all the members of the Romahtic generation the most relevant may be Hölderlin, Hegel’s friend and classmate at Tübingen. Hölderlin was also looking for a unity with nature which would preserve the clarity of self-possession. And his gods as well only came to themselves in human subjectivity. But they did not repose on a foundation of absolute spirit. Rather they were drawn from the primitive chaos of the elements into the light of measure and order by man, through the power of poetry and song.

Thus Hölderlin seems to open a perspective in which man’s freest expression follows the prompting of nature, bringing nature in a sense into the light of freedom. But this nature is not and can never become an emanation of spirit. It remains inexhaustible and unfathomable, a constant invitation to the creative activity which brings it to light.

Hölderlin’s position is not easy to interpret. In any case it may be inaccessible to philosophical statement. And one senses that madness overtook him before his thought came to mature expression. Hegel alone was left to give definitive shape to the thoughts and insights which they shared at Tübingen and Frankfurt. But to those who want to resume the task of Hegel’s generation, his too-soon-silenced friend may point a surer way.

 
    