## CHAPTER XVIII
## Religion
1
And so we come to the second level, religion. This is the domain of Vorstellung, which is a more inward form of consciousness. It is in a sense an internalization of what is bodied forth in sensuous form in the arts. For Vorstellen makes use of images, of the sensuous and the pictorial.

But it makes use of them for a further purpose, that of portraying or characterizing the absolute. Religious thought is a representative mode of consciousness. It uses sensuous images, but not just to contemplate their sensuous referents, rather as symbols which strain to render a higher content. This description of a higher domain in images drawn from a lower one is typical of religious thought. For instance, the necessary self-diremption of the Idea or universal is rendered in theology by the image of begetting: God begat his Son before all ages. Of course everybody understands that this is not to be understood in the normal sensuous way, but rather that it is being used to refer beyond to something supersensible.

Vorstellung is thus a mode of consciousness which is freeing itself, as it were, from the merely sensible in order to reach the universal. But it has not yet fully succeeded, it is still caught in the sensible, and must use sensible images. Of course, religion also makes use of conceptual thought. We sometimes find fully worked out philosophies within a theological context, as for instance with the Church fathers or the scholastics (GPhil, 169). But almost always we find a mixture of sensible images and universal concepts, such as ‘almighty’, for instance (op. cit., 171).

But what religion lacks even in its purer formulations is the grasp of the inner necessity which unites the articulations of the Idea and brings them back to unity. It takes two essentially related determinations and simply narrates them as following each other in time – such as, for instance, the creation of man and his fall, or the different stages of the creation. Vorstellung simply narrates (erzählt, BRel.297); it does not show the inner connections. This will be the task of thought.

But religion as a level of absolute spirit, that is, of Geist’s self-consciousness, is not simply a set of representations of the absolute, or of God. These are essential to it, and Hegel argues here against the Romantic spirituality of a Jacobi or a Schleiermacher, who wanted to displace the centre of religion onto the devotion of the worshipper, and stressed the unknowability of God. Hegel can understand this reaction to the Enlightenment – indeed, in a certain way he shared it in his early years, in the 1790s, as his writings of the time testify1 – but he utterly rejects this flight into the subjective.

For Romantic faith remains caught in some of the central assumptions of the Enlightenment. It remains focussed on the finite subject and his freedom, and it accepts the conclusions of Enlightenment epistemology that nothing can be known about God. Hence it turns to a worship of God which is pure feeling, a God about whom nothing can be known but that he is. The entire accent of the faith is displaced onto the devotion of the worshipper. And this, argues Hegel, is outside the very concept of what religion is.

What is this concept of religion, why does it require a representation of God, and what does it require more? From a speculative point of view, religion is a mode of Spirit’s self-knowledge.

God is God only insofar as he knows himself; his self-knowledge of himself is moreover his self-consciousness in man, it is man’s knowledge o/God that goes on to become the self-knowledge of man in God.(EG, § 564)2

In other words God comes to knowledge of himself through man’s knowledge of him. Man is God’s vehicle of self-consciousness. But then if God is Geist in the Hegelian sense, he is essentially determined to self-knowledge. And if this self-knowledge is vehicled by man’s knowledge of God, then the idea of a religion whose God is unknowable is directly counter to the very essence of religion. Against the Romantic religion of devotion, Hegel will insist that God is essentially determined to manifest himself, or as in the quote above, ‘God is God only in so far as he knows himself.’3

Of course, this process of self-knowledge is one which is slowly and painfully realized through history; for it is part of the self-realization of Geist. And in the early stages, God’s self-consciousness will be very rudimentary and inadequate, very distorted one might even say. But even in this primitive form, it is recognizably a consciousness of God, and hence is more authentically religion than the Romantic aberration. It is essential, therefore, to religion to represent God. But this is not all of religion. For what is being represented is the absolute, the ground of all, including ourselves as finite spirits, and moreover an absolute which is not finally separate from us, but of which we are the vehicles. Now this understanding of our relation to the absolute, separate and yet in the end also identical, is not present in religious representation as such; in any event, not as a clear idea, for then we would be in the realm of thought, and would have transcended Vorstellung and hence religion. But it must be there in some form. And in religion it comes in the form of devotion (Andacht).

The Romantics are thus not all wrong. They have left out an essential element, but they have hold of one of the dimensions of religion. For religious consciousness has to have a sense that this absolute is not just an object to which we are indifferent; it obscurely senses that this is a being with whom we are designed to be in some way united. Hence the believer not only has a vision of God, he longs for union with him. He is moved to devotion to the divine. Of course, the fact is that we are not only ultimately united with the infinite subject; it is also true that we are as finite cut off from it. The whole speculative truth is that the union is only made through a return out of division (Entzweiung). This is just what is sensed in religious devotion: that we are divided from God, from whom we should nevertheless not be divided; hence that we long to return to union with him.

Religion thus has two dimensions: a representation of God, and a powerful sense of separation from him which the believer longs to overcome. But there is also a third dimension: the cult. Religion is not just the locus of this consciousness and longing, but it also englobes the way that man strives to overcome this separateness. This is the essence of cult.

In cult, man overcomes his separation from God, his own subjectivity, the finite side of him which cuts him off from the infinite. He overcomes it by giving it up. Cult contains an element of sacrifice, and in many specific cults there is a real external sacrifice, something is really given up, or burnt. At the same time as man gives up his own separate subjectivity, and frees himself in sacrifice from his attachment to finitude, God becomes real in him: the sacrifice thus will often end with a communion meal, in which man is at last united with God.

Cult is thus the essential third dimension of religion: not only a representation of the absolute, not only an awareness of separateness and the vocation of unity, but a means of realizing this unity, even if only intermittently and never definitively. And this cult must not be seen as simply the act of man; God comes to self-knowledge through man, and man’s unity with God is also God’s returning to harmony with himself, Hence the work of reconciliation is not only man’s but God’s; and this not just in the sense that God also acts in response to man, but also that God himself lies behind man’s act. In terms of the theology of the ‘absolute religion’, we are pushed to worship by the Holy Ghost. In the end, cult is not two acts, but a single act which unites two subjects. The contradiction of theology between salvation by God’s grace and by human freedom is resolved, or rather, reconciled in the Hegelian speculative system.

It is because religion must be seen in these three dimensions that Hegel distinguishes his philosophy of religion from the old natural theology.4 This latter was concerned only with our knowledge of God, that is, only with the first dimension. But, Hegel claims, we are led ineluctably to the wider study from the very idea of God itself, once we understand it speculatively. For God cannot be considered apart, on his own. To do so is to remain on the level of understanding. God must come to self-consciousness, and this he does only in the community of believers, the cult community.

The concept of God is his Idea, to become and to make himself objective for himself. This is intrinsic to God as spirit: God is essentially in his community [Gemeinde], he has a community, is an object for himself [ist sich gegenständlich], and is this truly only in self-consciousness; his highest determination is self-consciousness. The concept of God thus leads necessarily of itself to religion...(BRel, 156)

Religion is thus more for Hegel than a mode of consciousness of the absolute. This in a narrow sense only covers its first dimension. It is also a stance of the subject, and above all a praxis which has as goal to realize our unity with this absolute. This will raise a number of problems when we come to see how Hegel understands philosophy as recapitulating the content of religion in thought. For a question arises whether religion is really to be put on all fours with art and philosophy as ascending levels of consciousness of the absolute (and hence self-consciousness of the absolute), whether religion is not more than a mode of consciousness, or more than this in a sense which art and philosophy cannot match.

It is the dimension of cult which takes religion beyond simple consciousness. It is cult which realizes the unity, or restores the unity between finite and infinite spirit. But then this would seem to put it in the terrain of human practice, of the building of life-forms and actions which bring about reconciliation between man and Geist. In short it would seem to put it in the terrain of objective spirit as well. For we saw objective spirit as the domain of those collective life-forms and practices by which Spirit realizes itself, creates for itself a subject in history who will be capable of being vehicle of its self-consciousness; the actual self-consciousness achieved being the domain of absolute spirit. Religion seems to straddle this distinction, for cult is more on the side of life-forms and practices, and indeed in ancient civilization, cult was not separate from the other practices and institutions which were the polis.

If religion can be considered separately from the other institutions of objective spirit in the modern world, it is that it has itself introduced a gap. The locus of objective spirit is a people; it remains this in the modern just as much as in the ancient world. A people is gathered around its monarchy, its laws, its representative institutions. But unlike in the ancient world, for the moderns, cult is not simply that of the people. It is in principle universal, and in practice goes beyond the boundaries of the state, while very often it fails to unite and hold all the citizens of any given political community. In this sense it stands somewhat aside from the institutions of the modern state. We shall see that while Hegel considers religion to have a crucial role in the rational state, he shies away from the idea of a confessional state. He takes the liberal line that men should take their place as citizens without regard to confession. He is even for giving full rights to Jews, which was very far beyond the conventional wisdom of his day. (PR, § 270). This principle of laicisation Hegel takes to be implicit in Protestantism. But this position also springs from the liberal-Enlightenment side of Hegel’s thought, which looked to an ultimate convergence between faith and Enlightenment, a convergence to which the reinterpretation of religion in philosophy is essential. More of this later.

But if we think of the role of cult as that of bringing men back out of their finite subjectivity to unity with the universal, then this is not basically different from the institutions we saw under objective spirit. And thus it is not surprising to find Hegel saying

If heart and will are earnestly formed through and through up to the universal and the true, then we have in fact what we know as Sittlichkeit. To this extent, Sittlichkeit is the truest cult.(BRel, 236)

But Hegel goes on to add in the next paragraph: ‘To this extent...philosophy is a perpetual cult.’ (loc. cit.)

All this is very confusing. Of course, there is a clear sense in which philosophy is a way in which man returns to unity with Geist, through understanding. But Hegel’s whole position is that this return in thought presupposes and demands a return in life and practice. The thought which returns cannot be disincarnate, but must be carried by a life which has been educated up to the universale. This life-form is that of developed Sittlichkeit. In this sense both can be thought of as cult, although the first presupposes and relies on the second. Philosophy, as inner understanding, is indeed thus a ‘continuing cult’. It is not periodic and intermittent as the cultic practice of most religion. But in the sense of its being the central locus of man’s effective union with the universal in life-practice, Sittlichkeit can indeed be called the ‘truest’ cult.

In short, the return of man to the universal must be accomplished in thought as well as in life. Indeed, it is not possible to return in life without one’s thoughts being appropriately formed (gebildet). But reciprocally, this return in developed thought must be carried by a developed ‘heart and will ‘and these are possible only in certain public institutions. Intellectual and life development are indissolubly linked.

But where does this leave religion? One can see a possible line of argument, based on Hegel’s categories, which would leave it no place in the full flowering of Spirit. If religion is a union of man with the absolute, both in consciousness (via religious Vorstellung) and in effective practice (via cult), is it not surpassed in both its aspects, by philosophy (as a higher mode of Spirit’s self-consciousness) and by the state (as a truly effective practice, a self-subsistent life-form, which no modern religious community can claim to be)? Would not the definitive human civilization substitute for the traditional amalgam of theology and cult a new combination of rational state and speculative philosophy?

Hegel in fact does not take this line. There are moments indeed, when he might seem to. For instance when he discusses the laicisation of the modern state, he takes a very tough line on the supremacy of the political society. Thus in PR, § 270 Hegel makes clear that religion cannot see its vocation as in opposition to the truly rational state. For this is the real expression of right in the world. Rather religion should recognize that the state is a fulfilment of its fundamental idea, that it is ‘the divine will, ...Spirit present on earth, unfolding itself to be the actual shape and organization of a world’ (loc. cit., p. 166). The essence of what religion enjoins is given authoritative embodiment in the Sittlichkeit of the state. Without the concrete expression of ethical life in the state, the moral precepts of religion remain uncertain in their exact expression, underdetermined, and subjective in their application.

In contrast with the church’s faith and authority in matters affecting ethical principles, rightness, laws, institutions, in contrast with the church’s subjective conviction, the state is that which knows.(p. 171)

Thus Hegel concludes that the state cannot be a confessional one. The state has to unfold its articulations out of its very concept. It has to be founded fully on reason, and hence cannot be grounded on mere faith in the truth, on a Vorstellung believed in by the instinct of reason only, which is all that even the fully true religion (Lutheran Protestant Christianity) can give. It must have an independent foundation in reason.

If the state is to come into existence as the self-knowing ethical [sittlich] reality of Geist, it is essential that its form should be distinct from that of authority and faith, (p. 173)5

This secularization of the state Hegel remarks could only arise in history from the church’s divisions, so that these far from being a misfortune provide another example of the cunning of reason.

But in fact Hegel does not think that religion is passé. Nor can this be simply dismissed as opportunism, a front designed to avoid the accusations of atheism which had bedevilled Fichte and would certainly make an academic career impossible in the atmosphere of Restoration Germany. When Hegel claims to be a Lutheran Christian, one can certainly question whether his position really deserves this description, but not that he truly thought so himself.

We can see why religion has a continuing role if we remember that it has three dimensions, not only knowledge of God, not only cult, but also devotion, feeling. Religion unites man to the absolute in heart and sensibility. We recall that Hegel saw this as the vital function of religion at the very beginning of his intellectual career, in the Tübingen period, which is why he was looking for a religion which was not only rational but would also speak to ‘heart, sensibility and fantasy’. And although he had come since then to see the crowning importance of philosophy, he never changed his mind about the irreplaceable role of religion. What altered rather was his appreciation of orthodox Christianity, which he now saw through the eyes of speculative philosophy as the absolute religion, rather than as a ‘positive’ aberration from the pure moral teaching of Jesus.

The reconciliation with the Absolute in philosophy pre-supposes one in life, as we saw. This is embodied in the state. But this cannot be achieved unless men are united to the Absolute in heart and feeling. Philosophy is, indeed, the late-comer. For although the properly articulated state is founded on reason, the final rational formulation of the Idea follows the entry onto the stage of history of the rational state (if only in ‘general outline’; much of course remains to be done to complete it). But what the state inescapably requires, without which it cannot hope for effective reality (Wirklichkeit), is some instinctual sense of its rationality, of its irrecusable authority as founded on the Idea, in short some ‘ethical conviction’ (sittliche Gesinnung) on the part of its citizens. And this is grounded on religion.

The union with God which is philosophy thus requires the union with God in heart and feeling which religion provides; and this not just as a temporally prior stage which is destined to be left behind, but in a continuing way, since the union in thought can only continue if the union in life persists.6 Thus while philosophy is higher than religion, in the sense that it understands both itself and religion while the converse is not true, it cannot replace religion as Hegel makes clear in this passage from the GPhil:

Philosophy is not opposed to religion; it grasps it in concepts. But for the absolute Idea, for absolute Spirit, the form of religion must be; for religion is the form of the consciousness of what is truly so as this consciousness is for all men. The cultivation of this consciousness [Bildung] involves: (1.) sensible perception, (2.) mingling universal form with (L), that is, reflection, thought, but an abstract kind of thought which still contains much externality. Then man goes over to the concrete mode of cultivation in thought, he speculates about what is truly so and becomes conscious of this in its true form. But this speculative activity which enters the process of cultivation at a certain point is not the externally universal form of thought which is common to all men. Hence the consciousness of what is truly so must [sc. also] have the form of religion.(GPhil, 192)

What Hegel seems to be saying here is that the continuing necessity of religion is contingent on the fact that not all men can attain to full rationality. And this might tempt us to see religion as a kind of poor man’s (or uneducated man’s) substitute for philosophy, designed to keep the allegiance of those who cannot really understand. This is the impression one might glean from another sentence of the paragraph from PR quoted above (§ 270); ‘since religion is an integrating factor in the state, implanting a sense of unity in the depths of men’s minds, the state should even require all citizens to belong to a church’ (p. 168. – Hegel hastens to stress ‘a church’, since the state cannot interfere with the content of men’s faith).

But to see religion as a means to keep the natives quiet would be seriously to misinterpret Hegel. The necessity of religion is not predicated on the inferiority of the masses, or their inability to attain the standards of rationality of an élite. On the contrary, differentiation is essential to the rational state as we saw, and every differentiated group is the vehicle of an essential aspect. Not all men can be philosophers because this requires dedication to a specialization which rules out other vocations and the development of other capacities. It is at base exactly the same exigency of specialization which prevents all men from being civil servants, or businessmen. Those who devote themselves to agriculture or trade cannot be specialist philosophers, any more than they can be functionaries of the universal class.

But this does not mean that the philosopher attains to a completeness which other men lack. This aristocratic ideal of all-round fulfilment is a mirage in the modern world, as Hegel keeps insisting. It died with the Greeks. The scope of modern humanity is too broad to be encompassed by a single man. Specialization is essential, and in a rational civilization, each speciality expresses an essential aspect of human life in which all others also participate in their way. Thus all men are in some way involved in the life of free individuality which is most fully expressed by the entrepreneurial class; all are related to the universal, although only one Stand, that of civil servants, devotes its career to this relation. Similarly, the non-philosophers have some inkling of the rationality that underlies things, and the philosophers also sense the absolute in heart and fantasy. As in the estates of political society, the development of each speciality is necessary to sustain the subordinate aspects of the other specialized modes of life. The philosopher’s work is necessary if ordinary men are to have an inkling of the rational basis of things. And the unsophisticated religious devotion of the many is necessary if the philosopher is not to dry up.

In this sense the continued existence of religion is essential to man as such, philosopher and non-philosopher, in a fully developed civilization. And that is why ‘in the nature of the case, the state discharges a duty by affording every assistance and protection to the church in the furtherance of its religious ends’ (PR, § 270).

Religion thus remains essential as devotion to God. And we can readily understand from the foregoing how its mode of representation, Vorstellung, cannot be put behind us. But how about cult? Cult is essential to religion, because it is that by which I bring about the union with the divine which my devotion longs for. That is why it has always been so closely linked with sacrifice, since by sacrifice I surrender my particularity and unite with the universal. It is because cult is essentially this transcending of particularity and reunion with the universal that we can think of both philosophy and Sittlichkeit as a species of cult.

But it will now be clear from the above why there remains a place for religious cult beside or between these two. For the union with the Absolute in pure thought requires a union in heart and feeling as one of its standing conditions. But why can this need not be fulfilled by Sittlichkeit? Because man’s reconciliation with the Absolute in the rational state is essentially parochial. He is reconciled with Spirit in its manifestation as particular Volksgeist. But man is called on to be the vehicle of a Spirit that strides beyond any particular Volk, that is master of all history and the necessity behind all nature. He must come to a sense of unity with Spirit at this level if this Spirit is to come to self-knowledge in man.

This shift to the universal, in the sense of cosmic, is one of the changes involved in the move from objective to absolute spirit as we saw in the last chapter. What I am suggesting here is that absolute spirit, man’s relation to the cosmic Geist, requires a cult of heart, feeling and effective practice to underpin the cult of pure conceptual thought which is philosophy. This cannot be substituted for by Sittlichkeit. Rather, since our allegiance to the state is partly predicated on our sense that it is grounded in the Absolute, Sittlichkeit pre-supposes a healthy religious life, as we mentioned earlier.

Of course, in the ancient world the two cults, that relating to the polity and that relating to the divine, were fused. But that gives the measure of the parochial nature of ancient freedom. In the modern world with its consciousness of the individual as subject of universal reason, the two cults are necessarily differentiated. State and church can no longer be one. In a rational civilization the two cult-communities, if one can call them such, would not combat each other. On the contrary, each would sustain the other in the way Hegel describes in PR, § 270. But they would not be co-terminous. The church as universal would have members beyond the boundaries of any particular state. And since it appeals to free individual conviction, it would never command the unanimous allegiance of any given community. So that churches would be both narrower and wider than states.

Thus religious cult is not just a thing of the past. It retains its place in modern civilization. This is why Hegel defends (AbsRel, 210–15) the Lutheran view of the Eucharist not only against the Catholic interpretation but also against the conception of the Reformed Church. Against the Catholics, Hegel insists that God is not present in the host in a sensible, external, thingly way. Rather the transformation happens in the communicant as he communicates. God is present, but ‘in spirit and faith’ (Im Glauben auf geistige Weise, AbsRel, 214).7 But against the Calvinists he insists that God is really made present, and not just remembered in ‘a purely bodily form of remembrance of the past, devoid of spirit’ (geistlxsose, nur leibhafte Erinnerung der Vergangenheit, loc. cit.). Hegel is not talking here about a rite of some past religion, but about the cult of the post-Reformation church to which he claimed to belong. The day of religion is far from past.

2
The religion which remains as the foundation of a rational civilization is, of course the ‘absolute religion’, Christianity. This is the culmination of the long, slow development of religion in history, which we shall examine in the next section. Christianity is the absolute religion because it presents the complete understanding of the ontological structure of things. It has the same content as philosophy; only its form is different, being that of Vorstellung.

Hegel will thus discover the principal tenets of his speculative philosophy in the major dogmas of Christian theology, thinly disguised by the images and symbols which are its medium of expression.

The dogma of the Trinity is ideal for Hegel’s purposes. The Universal goes out of itself, undergoes self-diremption and engenders the particular (the Father begets the Son before all ages); and the particular nevertheless returns to unity with the Universal in a common life (the Holy Spirit proceeds from Father and Son and unites them). Thus Hegel sees deep speculative meaning in the notion of an eternal trinity, a play of love in the absolute itself. As against all previous religions of one god the trinitarian one grasps that God is movement, self-transcendence towards the particular, and return to unity; that his unity is fundamentally a return of diremption, that he is three-in-one. God does not remain immobile in himself.

Of course this is still in the mode of Vorstellung. Thus theology speaks of God ‘begetting’ his Son, and it represents the necessity of this begetting by putting it at the beginning (ante omnia saecula). But still it has the right idea.

The eternal trinity in its play of love corresponds to the Idea, as it is taken by itself in the Logic in abstraction from its embodiment.8 But the Idea also must go out into external existence. This is what we have in the dogma of the creation. This creation must be ex nihilo, that is, all of reality must emanate from the Idea, Hegel cannot allow a beginning in brute fact, in the merely positive, as we have seen. Hence this dogma, too, is attuned to the speculative truth; except that once more its vorstellende form makes it portray the fundamentality of the creation in the language of temporal priority. The creation comes at the beginning of time. (In the beginning, God created...). And creation is seen as a free act of God in the sense of something he did not have to do. But this is wrong: the Idea issues in external reality of necessity (Cf. BRel, 146–8). For without this God cannot come to consciousness of himself which is his essential goal. He cannot really be God.’ God is not God without the world’ (Ohne Welt ist Gott nicht Gott, BRel, 148).

The creation must not only issue in nature, but in finite spirit, hence man is created. But finite spirit qua finite is cut off from the infinite. It suffices for finite spirit to realize itself, to act in any way, and it inescapably asserts its finitude. Man in acting realizes his own intentions, goals, ideas, and hence realizes himself as something different from the universal. Hence the Fall.

But here too Vorstellen presents us with a contingent event at the beginning in order to communicate the necessary and fundamental. For man cannot remain innocent. The only way he could would be if he could avoid acting. Only inaction is innocent (PhG, Chapter VII).

But the Fall as necessary is not an unambiguous event. It is the rise of evil, as the division from God, the assertion of the creaturely will against God. But this is also the beginning of salvation, of reconciliation. Man’s separation from God comes not just because he is a natural being and hence finite; it is because he is a finite subject, or will. Inanimate nature and the other animals cannot be evil. They do not reflect the fullness of God as Geist, because they cannot; but that is not evil. Man is evil because he opposes his will to God.

Hence this assertion of his will is also an essential step on the path to reconciliation. For in order to become the vehicle of true self-consciousness of Geist, man has to rise above his merely natural desires and goals. He has to develop his will. He has to oppose himself to nature. Thus what distinguishes man from the beast: his power to assert his finitude in will, is what cuts him off from the universal and is the origin of evil. But at the same time it is that which puts him in the category of a spiritual being, one who can be the vehicle for God’s self-knowledge, and the assertion of his will is the first stage in a process which will take him to being an adequate vehicle of God. Moreover there is no other road to reconciliation. In spite of the inference of the Genesis story, man could not have remained simply united to God before the Fall; for to do so would have been to remain as a beast. But then God could not be truly God, he could not come to self-realization for he would lack an adequate vehicle. God must have a finite spirit, a will, to come to self-knowledge in; but the birth of the finite will is the Fall. The Fall is thus necessary, an essential step to union with God. Or speculatively speaking, Geist is only Geist by returning to itself out of alienation from itself. O felix culpa.

Hegel takes warrant for this interpretation of the Fall as part of the economy of salvation, not only from the strain in Christian theology which insists that the salvation through Christ takes man higher than before the Fall, but also in the words of God in the Genesis narrative; ‘See, Adam is become like one of us.’ The Fall comes from eating the fruit of the tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, and hence becoming in this sense like God, a spiritual being (Cf. AbsRel, 102–9).

Man can thus only be with God by reconciling himself out of separation. The separation is man’s finite existence as a finite spirit. Of course the first way in which this finitude is cancelled is death, and this is thus seen as a speculative necessity. And indeed, the Bible tells us that the wages of sin are death. Men die because of Adam. But men must find a way of cancelling their finitude without annulling their natural existence, which is the indispensable foundation for their existence as spiritual beings. Otherwise God cannot return to himself.

So man must develop a form of life in which the overcoming of finitude and the giving of self to the universal is built in. This comes to its apex, as we have seen, in the rational state, which is why Sittlichkeit is the ‘truest cult’. But in the religious sphere, this return is reflected in the central Christian doctrines of the Incarnation and the Kingdom of God.

In order for the reconciliation to take place, man must come to sense in pain his distance from the infinite, and from this must come to see that an sich he is united to the infinite subject; and then he must form himself so that this unity is made real an und für sich in the human community.

But this speculative necessity is what is laid forth, albeit in the vorstellende mode, in the central doctrines of Christianity. In the fullness of time, when the appropriate point came in God’s plan, God became man; the two natures were united in one person. But of course we can understand in the light of speculation that Geist cannot simply be united to a finite subject. If these two are united, they are also necessarily rent asunder again, for no finite spirit can realize the infinite.

Jesus thus dies. But this is not the end of the story. Something has definitively been changed. As a result of this Incarnation men are now capable of developing a life of union with Geist in a way which was not possible before. And so the death of Christ is followed by his Resurrection and his Ascension or return to the Father (these two are never really treated separately by Hegel). And this return is the occasion for the sending of the Spirit, which dwells in the community and raises it to a life with God, so that the Incarnation is continued in the life of the Church, which is seen as the Body of Christ.

Christ’s death is thus as necessary as the other great moments of orthodox theology, the Creation and the Fall. Christ had to go as a particular finite subject in unity with the infinite, so that this unity could go beyond the immediate and become universal. The Incarnation had to stop being a merely external unity and become interiorized or spiritualized. These two developments, spiritualization and universalization, are really one. To become part of all our lives, the Incarnation has to be spiritualized, to be wrenched free from a particular, external, natural reality. But the understanding of this spiritualization grows only slowly in the Christian community. We saw in PhG how Hegel interprets the Crusades as a (vain) attempt to recover contact with the historical Saviour.

These deep speculative connections are represented in religious Vorstellung by relations of time. Christ as cancelled (aufgehoben) immediacy is seen as in the past, for this is the time dimension which represents cancelled immediacy.9

At the same time the faithful know that the unity with God is not fully realized so they place it in the future, as the second coming. Speculative thought, of course, understands that separation is eternally and definitively a moment of unity; that the fullness of the Kingdom consists precisely in this, that separation from God is constantly arising and constantly being overcome. Hegel has managed to re-interpret a surprising number of orthodox Christian beliefs in his system. But the ordinary believer then as now cannot escape the feeling that the sense of his faith is being radically if subtly altered. This in spite of Hegel’s protestations of orthodoxy.

The instinct of piety is dead right. Hegel is of course not in the direct line of succession of liberal ‘de-mythologized’ Protestantism. And this may throw us off the track. In fact with Enlightenment thinkers like Kant and Lessing, the process of throwing over dogmatic ballast had already gone quite far, in search of a religion in conformity with reason. A rational religion seemed to Lessing to be founded entirely on timeless truths. The great historical events in the relation of man and God, flight from Egypt, Incarnation, Resurrection, etc. turn out to be irrelevant. These stories were perhaps useful as divine pedagogy in an earlier stage of the ‘education of the human race’, just as we tell children cautionary tales before they can understand the general principles of morality. But with maturity we go beyond these tales to grasp the truth in rational concepts.10 Hegel combatted this de-historicization of Christianity, which struck at the central teachings of Christian faith. For in Hegel’s philosophy, the timeless truth itself unfolds necessarily in history. Historical events are not an irrelevant by-play, at best illustrating or dramatizing universal truth, but the inescapable medium in which these truths realize and manifest themselves. Hence Hegel’s philosophy which claims to be an interpretation of Christian theology restores the decisive events of Christian faith to their central historical importance. Thus Hegel insists (AbsRel, 130–42),11 that the Incarnation must be seen as a real historical event, and one which has played a decisive role in the history of Spirit. This coupled with the fact that Hegel incorporates into his philosophy the central and most mysterious Christian dogmas, like that of the Trinity, which the Enlightenment has a great deal of trouble with, and we can see how for some of his intellectual contemporaries he could appear as a restorer of orthodoxy against the ‘rational theology’ of the Enlightenment, which was pre-shrunk to meet the requirements of ‘understanding’. And so he saw himself (GPhil, 198–9).

But these appearances should not deceive us. In fact the Hegelian re-write leaves out the very essence of Christian faith, or indeed, of any faith relating to the God of Abraham. The central tenets of this philosophy, that the only locus of God’s life as spirit is man, and that this spiritual life is nothing but the unfolding of conceptual necessity, together rule out the kind of radical freedom of God to which faith relates. In Hegel’s system, God cannot give to man – neither in creation, nor in revelation, nor in salvation through sending his Son. To see these as acts of God is to see them in the medium of Vorstellung, and what makes them acts is just what belongs to the inadequate narrative medium, which we transcend in philosophy. For to see them aright is to see them as emanations of a necessity which is no more God’s than it is man’s – except in the sense that God or the Absolute is in a sense the whole or substance, and man a part or accident. But the whole cannot exist without the part. God ‘gives ‘me life, but it is also true that God can only be through this life, and that God must be of rational necessity. God ‘reveals’ himself to man. But this is also his revelation to himself, and this same necessary process could be called man’s self-revelation as the vehicle of Geist.

Lacking the idea of God as giver, Hegel cannot accommodate the relations of God and man as they must be for Christian faith. He has no place for grace in the properly Christian sense. As Karl Barth puts it,

Hegel, in making the dialectical method of logic the essential nature of God, made impossible the knowledge of the actual dialectic of grace, which has its foundation in the freedom of God.12

And he has no place for divine love in the Christian sense, for God’s love for his creatures is inseparable from its expression in giving.13 And what can be said about God’s relation to man must be said about the fully developed human relation to God, in which man comes to recognize his identity with the divine.

The creaturely response of gratitude and praise of God takes on a radically different sense in the rarified altitudes of the Idea. Both these responses transmute into a recognition of my identity with cosmic necessity and hence must cease to be gratitude in any meaningful sense (although something analogous to the glorifying of God remains, a sense of awe at the imposing architecture of rational necessity).

In short, how does a Hegelian philosopher pray? Certainly the prayer of petition has no meaning for him. Nor can he really thank God. What he does is to contemplate his identity with cosmic spirit, which is something quite different.

Kirkegaard was therefore quite right from a Christian point of view to protest against Hegelianism as an understanding of Christian faith, and to make the call of God to man something incommensurable with the universal demands of rational will (as when God commands Abraham to sacrifice his own son). And the question arises whether the claim to banish mystery altogether, to make the like of God fully open to reason, is not quite incompatible with faith in the God of Abraham. The ways of God who is the giver of life and author of man’s salvation from sin must be beyond our ways. A God whose life can be fully comprehended by us would not be an interlocutor who was capable of inaugurating a radically new relation, of wrenching us from sin into a new life. God’s salvation must be an ‘incomprehensible reconciling’ in Barth’s phrase (op. cit., 302), or else lose its character as radical giving, free initiative.

Thus the Hegelian ontology itself in which everything can be grasped by reason because everything is founded on rational necessity is ultimately incompatible with Christian faith. Hegel’s philosophy is an extraordinary transposition which ‘saves the phenomena’ (that is, the dogmas) of Christianity, while abandoning its essence. It is not a theism, but it is not an atheist doctrine either, in which man as a natural being is at the spiritual summit of things. It is a genuine third position, which is why it is so easy to misinterpret.

Once one gets the measure of the distance which separates the Hegelian system from orthodox Christianity, one begins to notice that not even all the dogmas are ‘saved’. The doctrine of the Trinity is, of course, given pride of place. But the incarnation, although Hegel insists on its historicity, is really given an essentially different meaning. We examined above (Chapter VII, pp. 208–10) in what the Incarnation consisted as an historical event, and we saw that although Hegel probably continued to see in Jesus an exceptional individual who lived in harmony with God in a way quite without precedent or equal in his time, it could not be said of him that he was God in any sense other than that in which we all are identical with God. An sich, we are all the same in this regard. Jesus was special in that he lived this identity für sich in a way that no other men could at that time.

As for the Ressurection and Ascension, although Hegel never states anything one way or the other, the impression one gathers is that he really did not consider them as historical events. Their whole point is contained in Pentacost, the coming of the Holy Ghost to the apostles. On Hegel’s view this fulfills the speculative necessity behind Christ’s death: he had to disappear as a particular, external point of juncture between man and God, so that the Incarnation could be spiritualized and thus universalized. In Hegel’s re-write it would have served just as well if the Gospel story had gone right from the Crucifixion to Pentacost, with the coming of the Holy Ghost carrying the whole weight of victorious denouement to the Crucifixion which Christian theology attributes to the Resurrection. For this and the Ascension play no independent role in his interpretation. They belong to the level of Vorstellung purely.

Thus while Hegel is not in the main line of descent of liberal Protestantism, he is the point of origin of another important movement towards a de-mythologized, one might say, ‘de-theologized’ Christianity. Contemporary theologies of ‘the death of God’ are his spiritual grandchildren. The filiation is either direct, as with Paul Tillich who very much influenced the theologians of this school, or through the young Hegelian Ludwig Feuerbach. And in a sense, Hegel himself was the first ‘death of God’ theologian. For we have seen that Christ’s death plays a crucial and necessary role as the indispensable basis for the coming of the Spirit and hence the Spiritualization of God’s presence, which is the same as the building of this presence into the life of the community. Men must first of all see God concentrated in a single man. But this point of concentration has to disappear, if the fuller truth is to emerge that men carry God as a community, that God is in each and beyond each. God is like a flame which passes from mortal candle to mortal candle, each destined to light and go out, but the flame to be eternal.

3
Christianity as the true vision of the absolute as subject, albeit in the mode of Vorstellung, is thus the absolute religion. But it comes onto the stage only as the result of a long and strife-filled development in history. But if Christianity is the absolute religion it has to be shown to be the truth in Hegel’s sense of all previous religions, that is, to develop necessarily out of them as their fruition. This Hegel tries to show in his lectures on the philosophy of religion. Let us now look at this.

Hegel’s philosophy of religion is like all his work extraordinarily well-researched, and full of interesting detail. As a work in comparative religion it would not stand up today in most of its passages, but it was remarkable considering what was available at the time.

After a brief discussion of magic, Hegel starts human religion under the general category nature religion: here we have religion before man has come to the understanding of the absolute as free subjectivity. He covers here among others, the Chinese, Indian, Persian, Syrian and Egyptian religions. But the uniting point is not so much the role of natural reality or symbols in man’s notion of God, but rather the fact that we are not yet at the stage of recognizing the absolute as free spirit. Thus in Indian religion, the absolute is conceived as a pure abstraction, as beyond all determination. But this is no closer to the vision of God as subject than the more naturalistic visions of God as the sky, or the earth.

Indeed, for Hegel there is a connection between this pure abstract notion of God and the most external, naturalistic conceptions of God. For his principle is that what is simply inner is also simply outer: that is, if the foundation of things is hidden, unknown, then the reality we know will be formless, inarticulated. The more we know the basis of things, the more we will recognize it in the articulations of the world; and the less purely ‘external’ these articulations will be seen to be. ‘What is only inner, simply an sich and abstract, is only outer’ (NatRel, 173). Hence it is no surprise that Hinduism is also a religion in which the divine is incarnate in a disordered multitude of external realities, cows, stones, trees, etc. The very abstraction of Brahma breeds this giddy tumult (Taumel) of divinity in nature.

Higher for Hegel is Zoroastrianism because this, while still a ‘nature religion’ has found a purer natural manifestation, light, and correspondingly has a higher ethical view. The crucial opposition is good against evil. But here we have not yet attained to an understanding of the unity of good and evil; each just stands over against the other. This overcoming of the opposition begins in the Syrian and Egyptian religions of the death and resurrection of Gods. And in the latter we get the fight towards a vision of God as free spirit which we find expressed in Egyptian art, and which we have already discussed in the previous chapter.

Out of this grow the two great religions which grasp in their different and opposite inadequate ways that God is free subjectivity: the Jewish and the Greek. (The lectures talk of three here, with the Roman as the third, but this really is a later development of the Greek.)

The first is described here as a religion of ‘Sublimity’ (Erhabenheit). God is seen as spirit, as subject, and is finally grasped in his purity as thought. But this is at the cost of placing him way above the world of particular, natural things. God is above and the merely natural cannot reach to him. Rather the relation of God to the world is one of Lordship (Herrschaft).

Jewish religion therefore achieved for the first time a real desacralization (Entgötterung) of the world, and in this way originated one of the strands which is constitutive of modern consciousness. But this did not of course issue then in the Enlightenment notion of a world governed by impersonal law. Rather it opened the way for a belief in miracles, as the special interventions of God in an otherwise non-sacred course of things.

God is lord; as a subject he has goals; and creatures are meant to be his servants, to follow his goals. Thus the vocation of men is to serve God. The law of morality is presented as his command. Man is nothing before God, and hence he stands before him in fear.

But God as thus above the world is the subject of a universal goal, only this is still abstract and unarticulated. This is an inescapable feature of an absolute which is in no way connected with the articulations of the world; his purposes are unspecifiable, abstract. Now it is the fate of the abstract universal to go over into the rawest particular. Hence this sublime God ends up being bound to a particular tribe. This is his people; his purposes concern the fate and well-being of this particular people. They are in turn his servants, his slaves.

This particular derivation of the national affiliation of the Jewish God from his nature as sublime runs Hegel into trouble in his consideration of Islam. In general Hegel gives little consideration to Islam, for it was rather inconveniently placed, coming after the birth of the absolute religion. He chooses to consider it as a related phenomenon to Judaism. Islam is then seen also as the religion of a certain community, but directed outwards, a conquering religion. It is a religion Hegel thinks which is inherently fanatical.

To return to the Jews, the people of God are thus seen as chosen by God and having a vocation to serve him in absolute obedience. They serve, Hegel says in fear, in a kind of unreasoning slavery. But the very fact that they give everything over to God, that they give up all their particular being to God’s service, puts them beyond fear in the ordinary sense, fear of loss through natural or human agency. On the contrary, they have a confidence that what God has given them cannot ultimately be taken away by others. They have confident certainty (Zuversicht) in God’s purpose for them.

But along with this confidence goes the fundamental inadequacy of the Jewish religion in Hegel’s eyes, that it shows us a God who is way above all particular things. These cannot return to unity with God, but remain unreconciled. Hence the Old Testament stresses the Fall as a turning away from God, not the aspect in which men also achieve the knowledge of good and evil. As a punishment men have to till the soil for their bread; but is this a punishment? Is it not work, the transformation of the world and thus self which distinguishes man from the beasts? This is what makes men free (RelGI, 87).

Hegel’s very negative and sometimes caricatural picture of Judaism has often been remarked. But with Fackenheim I would maintain that the basic reason for this was his love for the Greeks. The rupture in the beautiful Greek unity of the Godly and the natural, which Hegel as a member of the Romantic generation felt so keenly and so painfully, is put to the account of the Jews. Judaism is the original religion of the unhappy consciousness. Later on Hegel will go beyond this Romantic regret at the passing of the Greeks; he will judge the Greek civilization as intrinsically inadequate, and he will see the unhappy consciousness as an essential step on man’s road to universal rationality. This will change his view of orthodox Christianity (as he understood orthodoxy), but not of Judaism. We might say that the whole negative side of his judgement on the religion of unhappy consciousness is discharged onto Judaism.14

Nevertheless, Hegel does not let this feeling get in the way of his judgement of historical importance. Judaism is an essential phase, along with Greek religion, in creating the conditions, the fullness of time for the coming of Christianity. One might remark that it is already unorthodox enough to see Christianity issuing out of Greek and Jewish religion together and not just out of the latter; but this is related to the central unorthodoxy of Hegel’s middle path.

Judaism prepared the road for the Incarnation, in that the utter sublimity of God, without hope of any union with man, comes ultimately to be lived as pain, a pain in which man senses his separation from the essential base of things, a kind of total absence of the very foundation. This pain cries for a saviour, for the coming of God in man. But at the same time this coming is prepared by another religious development which is in its inadequacies the complement of the Jewish.

This is the Greek religion of beautiful individuality, of necessity and beauty as Hegel calls it in RelGI. The Greeks won through to a view of the divine as free subject, in which man could be fully at home, and with which he could be one. Thus the paradigm representation of these Gods was in human form. But the price they paid for this was that these Gods were limited; that is, there were many of them, none was equivalent to the absolute which is the basis and substance of all.

Hence we have the complementary inadequacy to the Jewish. We can see it this way: men at this epoch are limited, they cannot rise to the notion of man as such, the universal subject who defines his identity by the human universal of reason. These parochial men can therefore only feel united with a God who is himself parochial, who expresses their limited identity. But then there are many Gods and none is absolute. Or else they really do win through to the idea of an absolute God as single spirit above all, but then this God is way above them and there is absolutely no question of man being at home in him or feeling one with him; he remains insuperably above and beyond man. This God cannot be united with the world, for parochial men cannot understand a purpose in the world which would be commensurable with this God. His purposes remain inscrutable (abstractly universal). Hence they are (partially) identified with those of the most grossly particular, the chosen people. This is the only way parochial men can relate to this God. But because this God is really beyond and not capable of unity with men, belonging to him remains a servitude (Knechtschaft), which it will not be for the Greeks.

Greek religion is that of the beautiful unity of man with God, his being at home with God. And this is tied up as we saw with his being parochial, with his not yet having a universal reflective consciousness. It goes along with his total identification with the customary law of his own polity (Sitten). A man is nothing but a bearer of this public life; and this public life in turn is identified with the God, the God who founded and who watches over the city, the God thus whose people we are, but in a happy unity, not in separation and transcendence. This unreflecting unity with city and God, the unity of a not yet reflective, and hence universal subjectivity, is what underlies the nature of this religion as an art-religion.15 But in its parochialness it cannot understand that man as such is free, and is united with the divine; hence it is still a civilization with slavery.

As a religion of art, it has won through, past the dim perceptions of substantial power, of the divine in the natural which predominated in nature religions, to a luminous vision of the divine in human shape. The spiritual subjectivity triumphs over the natural, and achieves freedom. That this is the result of a struggle is reflected in the Greek myths. The Olympian Gods come to dominance through the conquest of earlier Gods who still represent intrication with nature or the sub-spiritual: with Uranos, the sky, and Kronos, time, with the Titans.

The cult of these Gods is one of union with the divine. Hence in the sacrifices we have not a renunciation (RelGI, 169–70), but rather the meat and offerings are enjoyed by the offerers. The God is made present in the community through his representation in human form, not only in statue, but in the ceremonial acts of living men. The great forces which surround men and with and under whom they live, the natural and societal (sittlich) powers, are brought by this cult to human shape, in which men feel at home. This shaping of the Godly makes this truly a cult of beauty.

Greek cult also had a sense of the universal, however. This came out in the mysteries where man was united with the divine in a way which went beyond particular Gods. But here, Greek religion still remained with the symbols of the earlier nature-religions, it could not bring these cults up to the clarity of daylight. In these mysteries there began to evolve the idea of personal immortality.

Hegel once again takes up the connection of Greek religion with the notion of fate. Because the beautiful individualities are not the absolute, this universal power underlying everything remains in the dark in Greek religion. It is only dimly sensed as a fate, an inscrutable destiny that floats over the Gods as well as men. Each of these Gods is set in a sense in a matrix of unfathomable necessity which he cannot fully dominate.

Thus the contingent course of events in history is also seen as under the grip of inscrutable fate. The subjective freedom of a god only extends so far, it can go awry in the hands of fate. Free subjectivity which shapes and dominates nature, and hence raises us above nature religion, only extends to a certain point. Beyond is the matrix of fate, and this can annul the purposes even of the Gods. These are immortal, they remain personally inviolate, but not their favourites among men. What can be said of the freedom of the Gods goes of course for the human cities which are in unity with them, but this time redoubled, for man is not immortal.

Hegel thus makes a connection between finding unity with a parochial God and the necessary concomitant of the belief in fate. When man rise to a sense of union not with a parochial God but with one who is himself the absolute, the master of all, then the notion of inscrutable fate will go. For free subjectivity now controls all, and fate is replaced by the notion of providence. Then the whole course of things, even the contingent detail, is seen as part of the divine plan, as an expression of subjective purpose.16

From this Hegel derives a set of differences between ancient and modern consciousness. The ancient did not feel that he could make a particular decision, a decision about matters where the particular, contingent course of events could affect the outcome – whether to give battle now, to travel or marry today (RelGI, 187) – out of himself. He has driven to consult oracles, to take auguries, to try to coax some indication of the future out of the fates.

By contrast the modern is grounded in the notion of the absolute as subject; and moreover has achieved in the absolute religion a surety of union with this absolute. Hence there is no corner left for any inscrutable fate. In part the certainty of union with the ground of things has developed in the modern world into the faith in reason, the faith that human reason can understand nature scientifically; and hence decisions which can be affected in their outcome by the particular course of things are made on the basis of rational prediction. This aspect of inscrutable fate has been laid open to human gaze. In part, we moderns are certain that our decision is grounded in an absolutely valid purpose, and not one which is merely partial, that of a limited god, which as such may go awry or be set aside. Thus both as regards the absolute validity (and ultimate success) of our purposes, and with regard to the choosing of appropriate time and means, we have no need to have recourse to oracles, in an attempt to pierce the veil of destiny; we can decide out of ourselves. As for the element of ineradicable contingency in events, this sets a limit to prediction, but we understand this, and realize that this cannot be remedied by any oracle or augury. We decide to the best of our knowledge and for the rest we accept the risk. But our sense of risk is less for we know that the absolute being rational cannot but triumph, even if not quite in the way we plan. We know this through our belief in providence, or the Hegelian speculative re-write of it.

This power to decide out of oneself is thus based on the vision of the absolute over-arching power as subject and ourselves as in unity with it; which in turn requires of course that we come to define ourselves as universal subjectivity. And this is absent in Greece. The Greek was sunk in the public life of his city. Thus both the decisions of a particular kind which he took as an individual, and the decisions of a particular kind which the city had to take were felt to be beyond his unaided powers. It was necessary to consult the oracle. There was not the sense of inner confidence, of understanding and being at home in the course of events which would have made possible such autonomy of decision. Even Socrates took particular decisions on the prompting of his daemon.

But there was more than this. The purposes even of Gods were under fate, and could be annulled. Thus even purposes which were ‘God-justified’ (RelGI, 153) could go awry. In face of this, the Greek developed a reverence for necessity (RelGI, 150–4). He wept, but bowed to it, identified with it as his fate, and hence as part of it. He achieved reconciliation and hence a kind of freedom, by taking this necessity into himself and seeing this as part of his identity. His early death is part of Achilles, as much constitutive of his identity as his great prowess and invulnerability. There is something beautiful in this identification. Like all beautiful things in Greek civilization Hegel will try to re-integrate it in his system.17

The modern by contrast is sure that the absolute purpose must go through, will somehow triumph whatever the pattern taken by contingent events. But this makes modern man chagrined at the reverses of fortune. He cannot just take them and identify with them; he considers his goals absolute. But of course for Hegel this is not the height of wisdom either; when modern man does not simply take his own humanly defined goals as the absolute, but identifies with the goals of Geist, then he is ensured against reverses. Any reverses he suffers do not matter because they cannot upset the outcome as far as the purposes of Geist are concerned. The true and only way to recapture the beautiful ancient identification with necessity is to identify with providence. Then one is free and fulfilled whatever the course of things. One is reconciled to the course of events. But this no longer means as with the ancients that one has to witness the defeat of a divinely-warranted purpose. Between these two forms of wisdom, however, lies the kicking against the pricks of modern man. (RelGI, 152–4).

The Greek begins to get a premonition, a sense of the shape and the rational structure of necessity, in tragedy. This for Hegel is the way Greek consciousness came to awareness of the deep contradictions in its life-form. In the Antigone, ‘for me the absolute example of tragedy’ (RelGI, 156), we have the collision between the right of the parochial city represented in Creon, and that of a universal morality, in the form of the demands of family love, represented by Antigone. In tragedy what happens to people, their fate, begins to take shape. Here we have heroes who are identified with a substantial, God-backed purpose, and who go under (Antigone, Oedipus). But what brings them down is not just portrayed as inscrutable fate; there is a sense that the necessity of this defeat is intricated in the very purpose they espouse; for this is partial and must come into conflict with its counterpart. This immersion in partiality is their pathos.

Hence tragedy strengthens the sense that men should indeed find their identity in what happens to them, it portrays the counter-shock of events as intrinsically linked with what men have identified themselves with. But by bringing this play of fate closer to our understanding, by discerning the meaning in it, it prepares the moment when men can step beyond these partial identifications. To begin to grasp the necessary mechanism of their collision and hence of their fate is already to begin to grow beyond them. And once man grows beyond these identifications he has risen to a universal subjectivity; he has deserted the city, and hence ultimately its Gods.

We saw this process earlier with the fall of the Greek city. It is the same as the emptying of Greek religion; the two are the same process seen from different sides. Man can no longer identify with the parochial, either the city and its Sitten, or the Gods. The universal subjectivity rises, but in doing so drains of its lifeblood both Sittlichkeit and the beautiful cult of unity. The individual comes to himself, but he is in a world, a city and nature which are no longer in unity with him; he is in alien land. He pines with an immense sense of loss. Jewish pain comes to meet Greek loss in a God-forsaken world.

The locus of this late ancient loss of the divine, of the individual in alienation waiting as it turns out for the Incarnation, is the Roman Empire. This is a universal empire which matches the rise of the universal subjectivity. The collapse of the poleis from within through universal subjectivity is matched by their collapse outwardly as they fell under universal empires, of which the Roman is the culmination. The loss of contact with the Gods is also matched by their forceful uniting in the politically-motivated Pantheon of Rome.

And in both cases there is loss of union. The individual cannot be united with this abstract world state which is simply a power over him and with which he can in no way identify. It can protect him or snuff him out at will without rational ground or a purpose which he can feel as his own. At the same time the unity with the Gods is also lost. In the Roman Empire they cease to be the centre of autonomous goals and become means used for the purposes of the state. This comes to its culmination in the late Empire emperor-worship.

In the lectures on the philosophy of religion, Hegel presents this stage as a third term of a triad culminating the Jewish and Greek. This is by no means the only way he can pick his way through this material. Elsewhere he moves from Greek and Jewish religion right to Christianity as the synthesis. And this is evidently the more plausible order in Hegelian terms: the incarnate but parochial God and the absolute but separated God together issue in the supreme God incarnate.

But here there is a preliminary, very inadequate synthesis: the necessity of Greek fate comes together with the particularity of purpose of Jewish religion in a religion where the necessity above the Gods is a particular purpose, but one which claims to over-rule all others. This is the Roman drive to universal empire, to which the Gods in the end are impressed in service. This Hegel calls the religion of finality (Zweckmäßighkeit). But it is an outer teleology. The purposes of Athena were not to be realized by means of Athens; we have here the beautiful unity which we also find in the organism, or any entity with internal teleology. But the religion of Rome is that of external teleology, where everything serves an end outside of it, where means and end are external to each other.

The reader who has caught on to Hegel’s shibboleths will already know that the Romans are not very sympathiques in his eyes. He will not be surprised by the detail. While having to give the Romans their world-historical due, Hegel plainly finds them very unpleasant. He represents this cold focus on external teleology not just as a late aberration but as basic to their religion from the beginning. The Romans had no idea of beautiful unity; everything was bent from the beginning to the purposes of their state. They gave themselves up for a goal which was not an absolute, universal one, but really limited, the universal empire of one people. Everything was grimly bent to this goal, and nothing had its purpose, its necessity in itself, which is the secret of beauty. They gave their lives in this external way, too. Gladiatorial combat was indeed reflective of this civilization, for death in this combat was a cold, senseless one, its entire meaning outside itself.

In any case, the ancient world reaches culmination in this sense of distance from God (Jews) and the loss of God (Greeks). The world pines for unity, and hence the fullness of time has come in which God acts in the Incarnation in the way described earlier.

The history of religion from then on is the history of the Christian religion. This we have already touched on from another side, that of the state – for the two became intertwined.

At first the union between God and man is only an sich; the Christian community feels itself to be a foreign body still in a yet Godless world. But this is not meant to be so forever, and gradually the Church builds itself into unity with the world. With the conquest of Rome by the barbarians this mainly occurs through the church acting as the tutor and civilizer of the barbarian kingdoms. But in the course of teaching these barbarians the church takes on some of their crudity; it becomes itself corrupted by the worldly power it is forced to assume to fulfill its task. It corrupts and reifies the Christian message by reducing the presence of God again to a gross external reality in host, relics, etc. And then it reacts to this corruption by the exaggerated other-worldliness of the monastic ideal.

But both this crude worldliness and its counterpart other-worldliness are incompatible with the full spiritualization of human life and community. A complete spiritualization of human life entails that man in his normal life become a fully adequate vehicle of Geist Man must be such a vehicle as he is in the family, working for the means to life, and exercising his choice by reason. But the monastic vows of poverty, chastity and obedience go directly counter to these three dimensions of normal life. This spirituality is thus a deviant one. It is only understandable as a pendant to the crude reification of the spiritual which it accompanies.

But both these must be done away with. The spiritual must be rescued from its presence in the purely outer in order to infuse and transfigure life; and life as infused and transfigured must thus no longer be renounced by an other-worldly spirituality. The monk’s life is against the true vocation of the Christian which entails family, work and responsibility. The monk must be made to wed, work, and choose for himself.18

Hence to the first stage of Church opposition to the world and the second stage of worldly power, must succeed a third stage in which the message becomes spiritualized again. This we have seen is the Protestant Reformation. But its momentum continues into the European Enlightenment.

The message of the Protestant Reformation is that the Christian faith must be followed in spirit, that is, built into and made to transfuse our life in the world. This means that the fullness of the Christian reconciliation of subject and absolute must be built into Sittlichkeit, the way of life of the sovereign, self-subsistent community. The state thus becomes the privileged locus for the institutional realization of the kingdom of God, and not as with Catholicism a church which by its separateness and opposition to the secular state proclaims the unredeemed and unredeemable nature of earthly power. The Catholic parallel power keeps the secular state in that condition of unredeemed refractoriness to spirit which justifies the finest aspirants to spirituality in taking the cowl. The principle of Protestantism is thus to accept the primacy of the state, to back it up and to push men into a full identification with their developing Sittlichkeit.

The first period of Christianity is one of opposition to the world; in the second the attempt is to hold the world in tutelage. But in the third men come to see that the world must realize spirituality freely in itself. And this, fully worked out, brings us to the Enlightenment. The principle that man, secular man, must realize the highest goals of spirit, that he already is master of the whole, reaches its fullest expression in a notion of the primacy of a reason which is purely human. Man identifying himself just as man hopes to realize the supremacy of reason on earth. God thus becomes simply an empty supreme being, without content or initiative or will, the God of deism.

But as we have seen, the Enlightenment which tries to draw all man’s goals and purposes out of himself crucially lacks content. It cannot find a true objectivity. In order to do this it must rediscover man’s link with the greater Geist, with God. It must become reconciled with a pure religion. This reconciliation is the task of philosophy. The emancipation of man, if pushed to its limits, brings the discovery of his true self as vehicle of Geist, and this is where philosophy unites religion and Aufklärung.

4
So we move to the highest form of absolute knowledge – philosophy. Philosophy when it reaches its fullest development expresses the same content as religion – the deep speculative truths we have found in the absolute religion – but in another form. This is the form of thought. Grasping the absolute in concepts, philosophy sees the inner necessity which underlies the content of revealed religion and makes this manifest. What is presented in a veiled form in Vorstellen comes here to explicit clarity, the thoroughgoing necessity which informs the whole structure of Geist. But the very nature of Geist is itself thought, rational necessity. Hence to grasp it in concepts is to grasp it in the final, totally adequate form, a form which is identical with the content, which itself determines itself to content, or produces this content out of itself. It is the elevation (Erhebung) of these forms

into the absolute form, which determines itself as its content, remains identical with this content and thus is the knowledge of that necessity which is an und für sich.

(EG, §573)

The believing worshipper senses that the Vorstellung of God puts him in contact with the absolute. This is the ‘testimony of the spirit’ which tells him that this content is spirit. But with philosophy this obscure sense is replaced by the certainty of reason.

This is philosophy at its apex. The whole history of philosophy is a development towards this, as we shall see in detail later. But at whatever stage, philosophy singles itself out as an attempt to capture the absolute in concepts. It cannot but be, of course, that in earlier more primitive stages its grasp is very imperfect, more imperfect than that of religion which since the coming of Christ at least presents the whole structure in the mode of Vorstellen. But philosophy in its final speculative development ultimately catches up and recapitulates the full content in thought.

Thought we have seen is the medium of total clarity, that where the maximum reflective clarity accompanies our awareness, and hence where it is maximally awareness. With total reflective clarity we have a complete transparency of thought. Whatever reason we have to doubt the possibility of this absolute clarity, it was Hegel’s central claim.

This philosophy is thus the really adequate locus of the self-knowledge of Spirit. It is the medium in which it returns to self-consciousness as logical Idea out of its external realization in nature and finite spirit. It is the ‘self-thinking Idea’ (EG, § 574). Thus the system closes with a reference to its starting point.

Now this philosophy as we have just seen reconciles the Enlightenment and religion. In the Enlightenment man frees himself from the external authority of the Church, and determines to entrust himself only to his own reason. But it pursues this emancipation one-sidedly out of a sense of rupture and opposition to authority, even ultimately the spiritual authority of God unmediated by man. But human thought which no longer identifies itself with the absolute, hence with the Idea which goes over into its opposite and return to itself, lacks the dialectical dimension; it is ‘understanding’ (Verstand) and not ‘reason’ (Vernunft). It pushes the clarity of thought to its extreme in marking and fixing distinctions, but it does not and cannot get beyond this to see that the distinctions overcome themselves, that the oppositions marked by these distinctions are not final but move to reconciliation, that each term reaches over into its opposite. The Aufklärung is the consciousness of les idées claires et distinctes, of the maximum rigidity and fixity of clear distinctions. It is incapable of understanding the dialectical truth in religion, and hence in real philosophy. ‘The Enlightenment, this vanity of the understanding, is philosophy’s most forceful opponent.’ (AbsRel, 225)

Since it tries to understand everything by human reason narrowly understood, it sees God less and less as active spirit and more and more as an abstraction. Its incapacity to understand dialectical movement makes the Enlightenment move to this abstract view of God as an empty supreme being, with neither the power to intervene in nature, as rationally understood, nor the authority to command what is not already a law of reason.

The Enlightenment therefore turns against religion. But we have seen earlier that this very commitment to mere understanding and its insistence of defining man as simply man makes it incapable of doing the task of reason and generating an adequate content for its will. Once the Enlightenment has taken the part of man against authority, the divisive distinguishing tendency of understanding pushes it back to an atomistic picture of man. Man’s goals are meant to be found in himself. But in himself he finds de facto merely a lot of desires which are not in agreement and which are not as such worthy of being made final purposes. So he attempts to rise above this to a moral view (Rousseau) in the notion of a general will. But this is still just a general will, i.e., one shaped by all the atomic subjects, not yet the will of a genuine subject which is their common substance. To grasp this we have either to make the transition to reason, to rise to speculative thought, or else remain in the confident relation to the absolute which religion still has. Without either of these Enlightenment man can generate no concrete content of action as good, and hence falls prey to the empty formalism of Kant and the destructive fury of the French Revolution.19

By its own contradictions the Enlightenment is destined to be forced beyond itself, to make the step which displaces the centre of things from the human self to the substantial subject. But in doing this it accepts the substance of the teachings of religion. Those who remain wedded to divisive understanding however, fight against this. Hence they oppose philosophy.

If philosophy brings the Enlightenment back to religion, it also re-expresses religion in fully rational terms. And this brings onto its head the opposition of many of the pious which is as bitter as that of the philosophes. They cannot recognize the content of their faith in Hegel’s speculative reconstruction (and as we saw above, they are hardly to be blamed).

But what is worse, the two kinds of opposition can come together. This is what we find in a certain strand of Romantic devotion which takes off from Kant and Fichte, which we see reflected in Jacobi and Schleiermacher, and which is evidently Hegel’s bête noire. Indeed the lectures on the philosophy of religion start in polemic against them, and it is fitting that they should finish with this polemic.

These Romantics combine the oppositions of both dévots and philosophes, for they attack philosophy (i.e., Hegel) for the over-rationalization of faith; and appeal rather to intuitive devotion and faith. But at the same time they are not in the line of the orthodox, they have not even this excuse. They have been corrupted by the Enlightenment to the point of abandoning the hope of reaching knowledge of God. God is unknowable, beyond.

Along with the Enlightenment’s doubts about our knowledge of the divine, this Romantic piety has also taken up its rejection of authority. It rebels against merely ‘positive’ religion, and insists on the worship of God which comes from the heart.

But then it falls into the same impasse as the Enlightenment. This man who cannot know God, or accept authority, is the same finite subject of ‘understanding’, who can only grasp his distinction from the infinite subject and is blind to the identity which overcomes separation. He suffers from the same incapacity as the Aufklärer. His faith cannot generate any content, a way of life which would express it. The law of the heart is just as empty as utilitarianism or Kantian formalism. By itself it comes to no determinate conclusion. In fact its content is dictated by caprice, or contingent desire. It remains simply arbitrary impulse masking as morality. Or else it shrinks away altogether from outer action to pure inner intention; and in this form volatilizes into nothing.20

The Romantics cannot get beyond themselves, their own élans of feeling, their own moral instincts, to the substantial subject which alone can give content to their ethical life. The truth that they are missing is man’s rooting in this moral subject. And this is the truth that religion portrays. And yet they claim to be devout! We saw at the beginning of this chapter how this Romantic piety which renounces knowledge of God and takes refuge in feeling is in violation of the very concept of religion.21

Hegel finds this position particularly irritating not only because it obstinately would not lie down and be superceded as it should, but because it resembled too closely his own views of the 1790s, when he also rejected positive religion in favour of a spontaneous devotion of the heart. His criticism of the Romantic rejection of authority gives some measure of his own development in the intervening years. The Romantics have, of course, taken up the basic principle of Protestant Christianity, and hence of true religion, which must ‘come out of one’s own conviction and not simply repose on authority’ (GPhil, 193–4). This principle Hegel held to all his life. But now he taxes the Romantics and Aufklärer with offering a caricature of the orthodox believer when they accuse him of blindly following external authority. For he is rather moved by the ‘testimony of the spirit’ within him which is called forth by the absolute content of religion.

But if the ordinary believer is cleared of the charge of mere submission to positive authority, the only figure who is allowed fully to have escaped positivity is now the speculative philosopher. Certainly the Romantic freethinker does not do so. All he does is canonize certain non-rational ideas and prejudices which come to him as spontaneous feeling. Really to think freely means more than just rejecting authority. It means being able to justify one’s starting point. And this only philosophy can claim.

That philosophy is now free from all authority, that it has made good its principle of free thought, it owes to the fact that it has come to the concept of free thought, that it starts from free thought or that this is its principle. Hence that one’s thoughts or convictions be one’s own does not yet make it the case that one is free from authority. (GPhil, 169)

Thus philosophy has to fight a two-front war, against the devout and against the Aufklärer, and this to show that they are really an sich at peace, that they are on to different aspects of the same truth. They must be ‘reconciled through the Concept’. This, says Hegel, is the aim of his lectures (AbsRel, 228). But it appears to have been tough sledding. And this may cast some doubt on how much the reconciliation has really been achieved an sich. For the strength of Hegel’s polemic on both fronts rather reflects how the opposition was, and was to remain, widespread. The last pages of the lectures on the philosophy of religion (AbsRel, 229–31) even strike a rather despairing note. They see the fragmentation in contemporary times as almost analogous to that in the Roman Empire. At the end, there is an enigmatic reference to a possible retreat of the philosophers to sanctuary (231).

This may have reflected that pessimism which Hegel seems to have been prey to periodically in his mature years, when he reflected on the contemporary course of things, and which could not easily be reconciled with his system. Officially, this fragmentation is destined to be overcome by a philosophy which recapitulates and saves religion by giving it its true form in reason, and in so doing pulls the Enlightenment beyond itself.

 

 

1 Cf. Chapter II.

2 Cf. BRel, 302–3. ‘Die Religion ist das göttliche Wissen, das Wissen des Menschen von Gott und Wissen seiner in Gott.’

3 This explains Hegel’s seemingly excessive remark about Romantic devotion, that it was less worthy of being considered a manifestation of religion than a primitive nature-cult.

4 From the very beginning, of course, in his writings of the 1790s, Hegel was interested in religion much more as living piety than as theology. Hence the early distinction between subjective and objective religion (Cf. Chapter II). One might say that it was the mature Hegel who saw the importance of theology – suitably re-interpreted by philosophy.

5 Knox translation amended.

6 This is substantially the point made by Emil Fackenheim in his Religious Dimension in Hegel’s Thought, Indiana University Press, 1967, 206–14, although my interpretation of Hegel’s philosophy of religion differs from his.

7 Cf. also GPhil 180.

8 Hegel thus refers to the Logic in its introduction as ‘The presentation of God as he is in his eternal essence before the creation of nature and finite spirit’, (WL, I, 31).

9 Cf. Hegel’s remarks on the relation between ‘Wesen’ and ‘gewesen’ in the Logic; (WL, II, 3).

10 Cf. Lessing, Die Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts.

11 Cf. also PhG, Chapter VII.

12 From Rousseau to Ritsehl, London 1959, p. 304. The chapter of this work devoted to Hegel is a penetrating study of the ambitions of Hegelian philosophy and its relations to theology.

13 Here I part company with Fackenheim, The Religious Dimension in Hegel’s Thought, Bloomington and London, 1967, with whose insightful interpretation I in other ways largely agree. But when Fackenheim attributes to Hegel’s God ‘a total and gratuitous divine Love for the human...by a Divinity which does not need it’ (italics in original, p. 153), I cannot see the warrant in Hegel’s work, or the whole structure of his system.

14 Cf. the discussion in Chapter II on Hegel’s early works, especially ‘The Spirit of Christianity’, where he deals with the religion of Abraham.

15 In EG, § 557, Hegel relates the unreflecting nature of art as a mode of absolute spirit with the unreflecting nature of Greek Sittlichkeit, of the era of art-religion.

16 Of course, this is not to say that there is no room for genuine contingency; we have seen that there is for Hegel; only that the plan of Geist is assured of going through whatever the contingent variations which it allows, also out of inner necessity.

17 This Greek-inspired notion of reconciliation with fate goes back to the ‘Spirit of Christianity’ manuscript of the Frankfurt period. Only now it has been firmly relegated to an unrecoverable past, and replaced by a higher mode of reconciliation.

18 Hegel shares the liberal-Protestant lack of understanding of the basis of Christian monasticism.

19 Cf. above, Chapters XIV, XV.

20 Cf. the discussions in the PhG on the law of the heart, and the beautiful soul, respectively 266–74 and 445–72.

21 Certain branches of Pietism also fall under this stricture. AbsRel, 226.

 
    