## CHAPTER VI
## The Formation of Spirit
 

 

In entering now the domain of ‘Geist’, what Hegel will call later ‘objective spirit’, we are dealing for the first time with real historical forms. Previously we were dealing only with abstracted aspects of these forms: we saw Stoicism, for example, in the development of self-consciousness; now we will come back to the full historical form of which it is an aspect. In this chapter we have whole polities, or phases in the life of a whole civilization, as our stages, and not just a given idea, outlook or ideal (which can ultimately only be understood in the light of Geist).

The PhG being a non-historical dialectic thus gives a kind a spiralling effect. We return at a higher (or a deeper, if this metaphor be preferred) level to the same phenomena. If from the dialectic of the master and slave to the end of Reason the implicit references had a rough historical order, we now return to the beginning. And at the end of this chapter, we shall again, in the chapter on Religion.

The chapter on Spirit takes us through some crucial passages of the philosophy of history. We start off with the Greeks, with that society of perfect Beisichselbstsein which Hegel as many of his contemporaries could not remember without nostalgia. This society, as we remember, was characterized by a perfect unity between citizen and society. The citizens’ fullest moral and spiritual aspirations were answered in the common life of the society. This common life was thus like a common substance; as part of it the individual found a meaning and purpose to his life; cut off from it, he withered. But this dependence on the common substance did not make it something quite other to which he could only be subordinate; for the common life was also ‘the doing of each and all’ (Das Tun Aller und Jeder, PhG, 314), it was the work of the citizens. If the substance maintained the individual, then the individual’s activity also maintained the substance.

But this early unity has to break down,1 and this chapter follows this dialectic. The fully universal individual must come to be, and he can only do so by breaking down the parochial walls of the city-state. There follows a long period of alienation, in which the individual stands over against a society which does not express him. This period of travail is, however, as always in Hegel, a period of formation. From it will emerge a higher stage. In the philosophy of history, this stage is defined as the law-state of modern times. In the PhG, however, we pass into the new moral consciousness of contemporary German philosophy, as a prelude to a new philosophically interpreted religious consciousness. The reason for this2 can perhaps be found in the fact that the PhG has different aims than the philosophy of history, even though there is obviously overlap in this chapter; our aim here is to lead consciousness to define itself as ultimately congruent with the world spirit. Hence there is no cause to tarry long in the philosophy of objective spirit; we must be on to what is later called in the Encyclopaedia ‘absolute spirit’.

1
The first part of the chapter deals with the original unity of the Greek city-state and its breakdown. This is one of the most beautiful passages of the PhG, in which the powerful poetic vision that lies at the base of Hegel’s philosophy comes through. The power of his images is heightened in that he explicits the inner tension and conflict of Greek society in the medium of Sophoclean tragedy.

In the most general terms the conflict underlying the original unity is this: the individual is perfectly united with his community, man is thus at one with a larger subject, with a universal of which he senses himself to be an emanation. This is as it should be. But this universal is not integrally so. It is the spirit of a people, just one among many. It is parochial. The intuition of genuine universality in man therefore progressively separates him from this community. It leads to a struggle within man and within the community as this public expression of the universal enters into conflict with the very vocation to the universal which underlies it.

The happy unity of citizen with city thus depends on man’s being at an early stage of development, ‘sunk in nature’. This must pass away. To put it in another way, as a particular existence, the city-state must go under: if it were the expression of a truly universal consciousness, this latter would survive it, would already be beyond it; it would remain itself through the destruction of this expression of it. But as a parochial consciousness the life of the city-state goes under with it, it ‘finds…its demise through another’ (findet…ihre Aufhebung an einer andern, PhG, 342).

But Hegel through the bulk of this chapter reads the dialectic of society’s ethical life, or Sittlichkeit as he calls it, on another level, more detailed; whose vocabulary is borrowed from the Greek tragedians. The conflict between the two universals is now seen as one between human and divine law. Human law is the overt, conscious ethic of the state in which the citizens find themselves reflected. Divine law reflects the truly universal, and it thus at this stage appears as unreflective, as an unwritten law, unmade by man, which has always existed.3 The divine law, as the truly universal, is concerned with the individual as such, not just in his relation to the state. The institution which stands as guardian to this law is thus the family which is also the sphere of immediate unity. The two laws have their paradigmatic expression in these two institutions, and Hegel draws the further conclusion concerning the roles of the sexes: men are mainly concerned with the human and political, women with the divine and familial.

The divine law is concerned with the individual as such, not with any of the particularities of his existence. But since at this stage the monopoly of his effective external life is held by his role in the state, his truly universal existence can only be envisaged as beyond this life, it finds expression in his Shade, where he has left the contingency of life for ‘the repose of simple universality’ (p. 321).

Hegel then gives a striking interpretation of the death rites of ancient Greece. Death is a natural negation, something which happens to man, a blow struck at him by nature. But we have also seen that death speculatively understood is a necessity, an expression of the true universality of the human spirit which thus cannot leave standing any external expression. The aim of the rites is to raise death from this first to the second reality, to re-interpret it as it were from something that happens to man to some thing done. The rites preserve the body which otherwise would be prey to all the blind forces of nature, would be strewn over the earth by jackals and vultures, and in committing it to the earth make its departure a meaningful act. So that even death is recuperated for self-consciousness.

Of course, being at a primitive stage, the recuperating self-consciousness is not the same as the one negated. At this stage an individual’s being beyond his death depends on his family’s actions in burying him. At a higher stage, where the truly universal is expressed in the public life of the society, we are all beyond our death as universal consciousness even before we undergo it. But burial is the expression which at this stage the true universality of man must have, and it is thus holy. The stage is set for the tragedy of Antigone.

For state and family, divine and human law must come to conflict. But before exhibiting this Hegel shows how they are bound up with and require each other. The state preserves society, and hence defends the family; but the family forms citizens for the state. Thus the divine forces underlying the family must be fed for the good of the state, and at the same time it is the state that sees to this cult, and thus to the feeding of the Gods. Men thus come from the family fed by chthonic forces into the light of political day; and they are called on to risk their lives for the defence of the state and hence these families, and in falling to return to the earth, to the pure individuality of the shade, to repose in the underworld from which the family continues to draw its strength. And reciprocally, the family, particularly the women, in following the rites bring the chthonic law into the light of day, and give it public expression, and by thus preserving the family play their part in the preservation of the state. The two laws should thus be in perfect harmony.

But they are not. At base they are in conflict, for the human law is not truly universal. And this conflict comes out in historical action. Here we come close to another basic Hegelian theme. To act, in the sense of effecting some important change on the world outside is necessarily to incur guilt. For our action makes real, gives effective expression to our particularity. But this constitutes a kind of defiance of the universal, and hence incurs guilt. Hegel’s interpretation of the doctrine of original sin springs from this. The sin is ‘original ‘in the philosophically reinterpreted version only in the sense of being necessary in principle for man; and it is necessary because man is a finite spirit embodied at some point in space and time, and hence cannot but act as a particular; and this in turn is necessary if spirit is to be, as we have seen. But we must nevertheless see this self-affirmation of the particular as ‘sinful’ because although essential for the existence of spirit it stands in the way of its full realization. It has thus to be overcome; and we have seen that death is one way in which it is surmounted; while the achievement of a fully universal consciousness is the way called for by Geist.

Thus sin is necessary for salvation in Hegel’s view. This is just another way of putting the basic thesis that spirit can only exist by returning to itself out of its embodiment, that exteriority or alienation is an essential stage in its realization. It follows that any attempt to achieve sanctity or unity with spirit is self-defeating which involves shrinking from action in the world and from the accompanying affirmation of particularity. We are condemned to particular existence as finite spirits. All we can do is to work through our particular existence in order to realize a form of life capable of carrying universal consciousness. We have to work through sin to atonement; sin itself is unavoidable.

Shrinking from action is thus to be rejected; it is another of those strategies of retreat which we have to set aside. And this point has already been taken up in the previous chapter, where the virtuous soul tried to remove his own selfish action from the course of things. We will see it again at the end of this chapter in the section on wrong and its forgiveness. The PhG recurs to this theme a number of times. Here Hegel repeats ‘thus only inaction is innocent, like the way of being of a stone, but not even that of a child’. (PhG, 334.)

But here we have not yet come to this full reconciliation; action in the world on the part of the community is still out of phase with the truly universal. In making effective the particular, action thus opens a struggle within the ethical itself. This struggle is tragic. We who stand outside it can see the conflict; we see Sophocles Antigone, and we can understand both Antigone’s arguments and Creon’s. If we had been there we might well have hesitated which side to support.

But this is for us a conflict of values. We are ultimately in the realm of comedy, because we are not caught up ourselves in the conflict. We suffer such conflicts ourselves, when two goods clash; but we are not caught up in these either, for we have a universal consciousness which can embrace both, which can appreciate the weight and claims of both protagonists. However we chose to arbitrate the dispute we retain this universal consciousness and give expression to it in our actions.

Quite different is the case of the tragic protagonist. He is identified with one side in the struggle, with human or divine law, to the point of not seeing the other, of seeing it only as a ‘reality without justification’ (rechtlose Wirklichkeit, PhG, 332). And this is because at the primitive stage where we are now, men cannot achieve this kind of consciousness, they have an immediate uncritical identity with the law; and since the law is double here, we have two kinds of ‘character’; the two laws take expression in different kinds of people (in, say, men and women) each of whom is totally and uncritically identified with his or her part. Hence Antigone and Creon battle out the issue of Polynices’ burial, each certain of being totally right.

The tragic character who belongs to this stage of unreflecting Sittlichkeit is one who acts only half-conscious of what is at stake. He sees one law; he doesn’t see the other which is tied to it, whose violation lies in the realization of the first. He is blind in the very possession of sight, like Oedipus who fails to see his father in the stranger he fights or his mother in the queen he marries (p. 335).

Nonetheless the connection is there. The protagonist having wronged the Gods cannot disown his action. It is really his and he bears all its consequences; he is fully responsible for his action because he did it with full determination even though he could not see its full meaning. But since these consequences were unsuspected by him he experiences the dénouement as fate. We see once again Hegel’s idea of fate as uncomprehended necessity, as was reflected in the discussion of pleasure in the last chapter. Moira plays a big role in Greek thought precisely because men have not achieved universal consciousness, and cannot contain within their purview the whole sweep of necessity, which appears thus as something willed from outside.

In the philosophy of religion Hegel makes the same point in another way. The Greek god is a perfect marriage of the divine with human form, just as the Greek city-state marries the individual and the political. But the price is the same in both cases; man is not ready for reconciliation with the truly universal, so the gods are human at the price of being multiple and particular, as the cities are true ethical substances at the same cost. Conversely, in the same epoch, the people who really grasp the full universality of spirit, the Jews, are those who feel the greatest alienation from the divine. But universal Geistmust find some expression; and since the Gods are particular, the universal re-appears as a necessity of fate to which even the gods are subject.

But it is precisely this experience of necessity which ultimately does away with the protagonist who is uncritically identified with one law. He goes under, destroyed by his own contradictions; and men achieve from this painful experience a consciousness which can take in the whole conflict. But this is a universal consciousness, that is, one which is no more uncritically identified with a particular society and its ethic, but which thinks in universal terms. In other words the experience of contradiction wrenches men loose from their spontaneous unquestioning allegiance to their particular city. But this must mean the decline of the city itself; for its whole strength reposed on their perfect unity of citizen and ethical substance. Instead now the individuals see themselves as universal, but by the same token as alienated from their society. The city unsupported goes under before the universal empire, which suits this new phase. But this is a phase of alienation: the new empire cannot express in its institutions and mores the deepest values and aspirations of its people; it is too vast and diverse. It simply unites men externally, by making them all subject to the same power. The decline of the city-state leaves nothing comparable in its place; deserted it goes under before the onslaught of the universal empire; but this ushers in an age of alienation in which the individual of universal consciousness stands over against a state which in no way reflects him, which is experienced simply as external power and constraint.

How this breakdown actually takes concrete historical form is left rather vague in this chapter. In other places, the philosophy of history and the history of philosophy, Hegel will comment on the rise of universal consciousness with the Sophists and Socrates. In the next chapter of the PhG we will go through the connected evolution of religious forms.4

Here Hegel seems little concerned to give a full picture. He is not at much pains to show how tragic conflict leads to historical breakdown. The only treatment of this is in a passage of striking poetic power in which he re-affirms that’ the manifest spirit has the root of its power in the lower world’ (PhG, 339), and that in dishonouring the dead it saps its own power. Then Hegel presents us the image of the dogs and carrion birds defiling the altars of surrounding peoples with the remains of the unburied, and these neighbours taking vengeance on the city. But our admiration for the beauty of this passage fails to blind us to the sketchy nature of the underlying explanation.

Hegel then adds another derivation in which he starts from the battle between the family and the state, between men and women, the institutional and individual protagonists of the two laws. Being repressed by the state, the family and particularly its women take their revenge in subtle forms of corruption. Women induce their menfolk to exercise power for the dynasty rather than for the public weal, they turn the heads of youth away from the wisdom of the elders; and since this youth in turn must be exalted by the state as its defenders, their corruption has disastrous effects.

In any case, by whatever exact steps, the ethical spirit goes under and gives way to an age of alienation. The divine law, previously represented by the individual as shade now comes out into the light of day as the universal ‘I’ of self-consciousness. But this universal individual now exists in a society which in no way reflects him, which is pure external power. His affirmation of self as universal self-consciousness is therefore an abstract one; the external reality of his life is out of his control, at the mercy of purely external power. True, power in order to be exercised must be concentrated somewhere. At the summit of the state is thus an emperor. But this new universal state has broken with ethical substance, with the underlying sense of limit with which men were totally identified. It has put nothing in its place except sheer power. The reign of the emperor is thus that of uncontrolled capricious will.

The ruler too is a universal consciousness, but at this stage this means only that he has broken with any sense of unquestioned allegiance to a common way of life. The achievement of universality has been won at the expense of the political ethic; the former one has disappeared and a new one has yet to be painfully evolved. We are thus in the realm of sheer power; the self-definition of the subjects as pure individuals over against the state is matched by the naked power of the state which keeps them in line by force and frequently destroys them in the process.

Self-consciousness can thus only maintain its sense of integrity by a strategic retreat; and this is thus the age of Stoicism, which we now see as a full historical form. That is, self-consciousness can only see itself as universal and free by defining itself as a purely inward spiritual reality; the freedom of Stoicism is that of thought which abstracts from external conditions. But just as above in the chapter on self-consciousness, this position of retreat is untenable and must go through the corresponding evolution, through the equivalent of scepticism, to arrive at unhappy consciousness.

The Roman epoch saw the development of individual property rights: legally, we have the beginnings of the recognitions of rights as inhering in a person. But this person, as subject, was at the mercy of the state. Hence the external content he gave to his life, his property, was entirely at the mercy of arbitrary will. Hence the person experiences, as the sceptical consciousness did, his total dependence on the contingent and mutable, his utter lack of integrity.

And the result is, as seen through either dialectic, that the subject comes to place his integrity in something outside himself, to which he feels subordinate and to which he aspires. In other words he ‘alienates’ his integrity. Under the discipline of this alienation (Entfremdung) he undergoes a formation (Bildung) which will lay the groundwork for a recovery of freedom on a higher level.

2
The next section of the chapter deals with this era of alienation and formation which stretches from the Roman Empire to the contemporary period. But since Hegel is not trying to present a detailed study in the philosophy of history his interest focusses rather on the culmination of this period, the eighteenth century, the Enlightenment and the Revolution. We have here in condensed form a complex and rich Hegelian interpretation of these two epoch-making phenomena, and it is on these that our account will focus.

Alienation consists in this, that men no longer try to define themselves as pure thought, that they accept their identification with external social reality, and in this they are once more like the citizens of the city-state; but unlike these, they experience this social reality as other, they do not feel bei sich in it. This alienated identification, as against the happy identification of the Greeks, thus does not express itself in an explicit consciousness of oneness with the society; rather it comes out in the sense that they must aspire to close the gap between themselves and this social reality, that they must give up their individual particularity and come closer to the essential substance of their lives in serving a wider cause, such as the state. This sense that the substance of their lives lies beyond them is the essence of alienation, and the service, discipline and self-transformation which it inspires is what forms men for the next stage.

For this alienation is a necessary stage on the road to the final realization of spirit; and as such it is a mixture of the real and the illusory. In fact men do depend on something greater, on a spirit which is not just that of man, to which men have rather to confirm. But at the same time this Geist is one in which man should recognize himself fully, in which he should feel fully at home, once he sees himself qua finite spirit as an emanation and vehicle of Geist. The phase of alienation is one in which the dependence relation is clear, while the self-recognition is cloudy and obscure. The sense of being bei sich in the Absolute is present only in a veiled form, in religious consciousness, and is displaced out of this world into a beyond.

The phase we are dealing with is thus the same as that we described earlier as the period of unhappy consciousness. It has the sense of a reconciliation which is felt as absent, in another world or long ago and far away, a reconciliation achieved elsewhere on which we essentially depend. This is part of the consciousness of alienation.

We can think of this consciousness as false in failing to see our unity with the absolute. But at the same time it is right to deny this, for at this stage men are not yet ready; they have not yet achieved the universal consciousness which fully reflects their unity with Geist. The consciousness of unity as projected in another world is therefore a distorted image of a true fact, that men have yet to transform themselves in order to realize this unity fully. And the function of alienation is to provide the motive for this transformation; it is a kind of tutelage during which men are formed to overcome it.

The basic attitude of alienation is one in which men feel that their substance lies in something outside them, and hence that they can only realize themselves by overcoming their particularity and conforming to this reality. This necessity is felt both by those who willingly accept it and try to act according to it, and by those who resent it and kick against it, what Hegel calls the ‘noble’ (edelmütig) and ‘base’ (niederträchtig) consciousnesses respectively. Among external realities to which man can be thus related Hegel mentions state power and ‘riches’, which is expanded to include the operation of the economy as a whole; but it is understandable from the sequel that other structures can play this role, that of the religious community for instance.

Now the essence of the development under alienation is that men are formed to overcome it. And the result is that out of this alienation eventually arises a consciousness which has ‘seen through’ these external realities (I am here leaving out a great deal of interesting detail in the dialectic). Men develop to the point where they can grasp these realities for what they are, they can see state power and riches as phenomena in the world like any others, destined to disappear like any other, bound by the same law-like conditions, and suffering the same reversals, as the seemingly good and holy is discovered to be bound up with the evil and base and profane. This ‘insight’ (Einsicht), which manifests itself at first as a debunking of pretentious claims, reaches its culmination in the Enlightenment.

The Enlightenment represents the beginning of the end of alienation in that the realities towards which the piety of alienated consciousness is directed, and to which it tries to conform, are cut down to size. All external reality is objectified, deprived of spiritual significance and seen as a world of sensible material things spread out before a universal scientific consciousness. State and religious structure are no longer awe-inspiring realities to which man must conform himself, but simply part of the neutral stuff of the world, open to the scrutiny of scientific consciousness, and at its disposal. The significant reality becomes once again man, or rather the universal scientific consciousness who has thus come to dominate the world intellectually.5

The self is once again the centre of things, and yet we have a stage very different from that of Stoicism, which also focussed on the self as universal consciousness. For this was a phase of retreat, the self discovered itself outside of and without taking account of external reality; here on the contrary, scientific consciousness claims to have seen through this reality, to have dominated it intellectually – and very soon as we shall see in the French Revolution it will claim to dominate it in act by transforming reality according to universal will. Between Stoicism and the Enlightenment has lain the whole period of alienation and formation in which men have learnt to understand and gain some control over the world, natural and political. The scientific consciousness of the modern age underlies the Enlightenment.

From this notion of the Enlightenment as the insight into reality which cuts it down to size as a world of sensible material things, we can understand two basic features of its ideology which Hegel singles out. First, the absolute or God is reduced to the empty notion of a supreme being (Hegel uses the French expression ‘être suprème ‘) to which no further description can be applied. For all particular reality is now seen as merely material and sensible, and all particular descriptions can only be given meaning as interpreted in the light of this reality. So that any attempt to fill out the notion of God by describing him as father, creator, ascribing to him acts in history, etc. are bound to appear totally incongrous, for they depend on our seeing the relationships or acts in question as embodying some spiritual significance. We have to see natural fatherhood as carrying with it (ideally) a relation of love and spiritual care in order to apply this image to God; we have to see God’s acts in history also as signs, as a language and not just as a set of material changes. But the Enlightenment consciousness sees the world as an assemblage of purely material sensible things; it therefore cannot find a language to speak of God nor conceive of God as intervening in history. If it thinks of God at all, it is forced to a kind of Deism, a cult of the supreme Being.

Of course, many Aufklärer did not believe in God at all, but for Hegel not much separated these materialists from those who believed in a super-sensible reality. For they thought of some abstraction like Nature or Matter as underlying the changing reality of the sensible world. But an abstraction like Matter, which bears none of the particular descriptions of things in the world, is indistinguishable from a spiritual substrate; and a spiritual substrate without particular description is indistinguishable from pure being. We have here an echo of Hegel’s famous opening dialectic of the Logic, that of Being and Nothing; and the message is the same: in the end all abstractions are alike. Real spirituality is also material.

The second notion of Enlightenment ideology, which Hegel makes one of the central themes of this chapter, is that of the useful, the concept underlying utilitarianism. To think of something as useful is to think of it as without intrinsic significance, rather its significance is to serve the ends of something else. This notion of the useful flows naturally out of the Enlightenment outlook; for this sees the world as made up of material things without any further significance. This neutral world has no meaning for man, either as expressive of something higher, or as embodying a form with which he must conform in order to realize himself. As neutral, the things in the world can only be given significance by serving some human purpose. The only category they can fall under as far as their significance for man is concerned is the useful.

Utilitarianism is therefore the ethic of the Enlightenment. Utilitarianism is an ethic in which acts are judged according to their consequences, that is, their relevance to some extraneous end, hence their usefulness. This is opposed to an ethic which judges an act by some intrinsic quality, such as its embodying a given virtue, or conforming to some moral law. Such intrinsic properties are swept aside by the Enlightenment as nonsense, which accepts only material reality and its law-like connections, and has no place for normative properties, e.g., virtues, or a normative order such as putatively underlies natural law.

But the hidden contradiction in this for Hegel is that the category of the useful has no stopping point, it is universal in application. Some things maybe judged useful for my purposes; but I too am a particular reality in the world, there is no reason why my purposes should be considered final ends. I and my purposes in turn can be seen as serving or disserving the ends of others, perhaps that of society in general; and these others, or society in general can be seen as serving or not the purposes of others, say the members of this society, and so on. We have a bad infinite.

Hegel expresses this by saying that each thing can be seen as in itself, but also as for an other, that is, as having just instrumental significance. There is no structure of significant reality which forces us to stop somewhere, which expresses the final purpose; or as Hegel puts it this chain of extrinsic justifications does not return to a self, that is to a subjectivity which would encompass the whole development. Each entity serves another, and so on ad infinitum; and we know now that for Hegel this situation is profoundly unsatisfactory. There must be a final order of things which all partial goals serve, which encompasses them all, and which we can identify with. For only thus can we really be bei uns in the universe. In the endless chain of partial purposes of utilitarianism, each one of us plays his part, but we end up serving an extraneous purpose with which we cannot identify – as we can with a spiritual order of the universe of which we are emanations – and we remain thus before a foreign universe.

The basic error of the Enlightenment is to have seized only half the truth. It is right to have debunked the pretensions of kings and churches, to have seen that universal scientific consciousness can penetrate fully external reality, and should thus be considered of greater significance. It is right to perceive that ultimately rational subjectivity is dominant. But it is wrong in thinking that this subjectivity is simply human, in leaving no place for a cosmic Geist except the empty slot of the supreme being. For in fact human subjectivity only achieves dominance as the vehicle of this greater subject. Men have to accept that there is significant reality outside them, and in return they can feel fully bei sich in so far as they cease to identify themselves just as men, but rather see themselves as vehicles of absolute subject. The basic mistake of the Enlightenment is to refuse this transcendence and try to achieve this consummation on behalf of man alone; it tries to make man’s subjectivity alone dominant instead of participating in the dominance of the absolute subject.

Now the Enlightenment is matched by another outlook which is symmetrical with it, which Hegel calls faith (Glaube). This is a form of religious consciousness which projects the true reconciliation of spirit and reality, butin another world. It has grasped the fact that spirit and thought underlies all reality (Hegel is of course here speaking of Christian faith), but it is unconscious of its object as thought. Rather faith understands the Absolute through metaphor and images, a mode of awareness which Hegel calls representation (Vorstellung), and hence it sees as another world of contingently related reality what really should be seen as the necessary structure of this.

Now faith is symmetrical with the Enlightenment, because it is long on the recognition of absolute spirit and our dependence on it, where the Enlightenment is deficient; but it does not see the essential role of human subjectivity which is the central idea of the Enlightenment. Its transcendent world is fixed and impenetrable to active human reason. Reason cannot run easily through its articulations as the Enlightenment claims to do for those of the natural world. These two views thus complement each other. Being blind to this, however, they enter into conflict.

Hegel in setting the stage for this conflict represents faith as well as an outcome of the period of alienation. This may seem strange since this religious consciousness is part and parcel of the phase of alienation itself. Is this ‘derivation’ then just an artificial device to allow Hegel to discuss the struggle between Enlightenment and faith as one between two forms of the same stage, rather than as a battle of future with past? Two points need to be made before we jump to this conclusion. The first is that religious faith from the very beginning contains a certain element of that debunking of the structure of this world which we saw in the insight of the Enlightenment. Only it robs them of their significance not for the benefit of enlightened human consciousness but rather in favour of the higher otherworldly reality. The second point is that Hegel is here not talking about Christian faith in general, but rather the more spiritualized form of protestant faith which he knew in contemporary Germany and which was already influenced by the Enlightenment to some degree. In a telling passage (387–8), he describes how the spirit of the Enlightenment crept into contemporary theology unconsciously, as theological thinkers began to frame their thought and answer questions in categories posed by the Enlightenment.

This description of osmosis and of dialogue between two contemporary views seems odd to us only because we are much more aware of the French scene where there really was a knock-down, drag-out fight between the Enlightenment as a new ideology and a Catholic Church which prided itself on defending old long-standing ideas (whether its theology really was that old is another matter). The situation was quite different in Germany, and however he introduced it, Hegel could not avoid a discussion of this dialogue.

The dialogue is conditioned for Hegel by the fact that both sides have hold of the same truth, but which they see differently and one-sidedly. The fact that they are at root the same facilitates the penetration of faith by the Enlightenment; and insofar as it not only peacefully penetrates but combats faith, their basic identity makes its shots strike home. But at the same time it opens the Enlightenment to a tu quoque reply.

Not recognizing itself in its adversary, the Enlightenment both grasps and misunderstands faith. Its basic effect is to break apart what for faith is essentially united. The religious symbol, the statue, host, altar, or whatever, which is seen by faith both as a material object and as the bearer of something higher, is reduced to its material sensible dimension by the Enlightenment. It accuses faith of worshipping just stones, or bread. Now, of course, this is absurd; and yet the barb goes home; for when faith tries to examine the nature of this unity between the divine and the merely external, it finds that it cannot comprehend it, and particularly that it cannot comprehend it with the intellectual structures of the Enlightenment which it has gradually come to accept. It is thus forced to an even more ‘spiritual’ religion in which the things of God are more clearly separated from this world.

In a similar manner the Enlightenment reduces the testimony of scripture to the rank of historical documents; and shows that as such they have little probative value. But it does not see that their value lay in the fact that they were recognized by religious consciousness spontaneously as valid, rather than residing in their strength as historical evidence. But this testimony of the spirit itself becomes problematic, and hence uncertain under the onslaught of Enlightenment categories. In the same way the Enlightenment misunderstands and in so doing transforms faith’s idea of sacrifice and mortification.

The strength of the Enlightenment in its struggle with faith is that it brings together ideas which faith keeps apart in its consciousness. When it accuses faith of inventing its object, it marks a point Hegel says, in that man recognizes himself in the Absolute, is at home in it, and hence it can be said in a sense to come out of his own subjectivity. This fact makes it hard for faith to rebut the charge of the Enlightenment by rejecting it simpliciter. But of course it is also true that the Absolute is beyond man; this is the essential complement without which we have only a half-truth. Strangely enough the Enlightenment hints at this as well when it speaks of faith as something foisted on the people by a scheming priesthood. But this half-truth by itself is even more absurd, says Hegel. In fact a people cannot be deceived on such a fundamental matter (p. 392). It is absurd to think of religion as a pure invention which people are got to believe; unless it awoke some echo in them, they would never accept it. Religion in Hegel’s view must always be seen as a veiled, unclear representation of the truth.

But now it is the Enlightenment which fails to put together its ideas about religion. In denouncing the one-sidedness of religion it fails to see its own one-sidedness.

The result for religion is an ‘enlightened’ theology, where God has become a shadowy supreme being, but which unlike the unbelieving Enlightenment suffers a longing to discover and unite with God. Hegel is obviously referring to the theology of contemporary thinkers like Jacobi and Schleiermacher, who had felt the weight of the Enlightenment critique, and tried to find another path to God through sentiment and intuition.

But Hegel also seems to be claiming a kind of synthesis between the two in the form of a mature Enlightenment which is ready to go over into action in the form of the French Revolution. But this supposedly maturer form is hard to distinguish from the earlier one. It has before it the world as understood in the category of the useful, and this says Hegel provides the independent external reality which was missing previously (412-13); but since the Enlightenment première manière was also characterized in terms of the useful, it is difficult to see what has changed.

The point of the passage may be clearer if we ignore this supposed step forward, and focus on the transition of the Enlightenment into revolutionary action. For this is readily understandable: this consciousness sees the world as neutral, as capable of being formed to fit human purposes. There is nothing in it which has intrinsic significance, which demands to be treated with respect and preserved; all can be altered and reformed according to man’s needs and goals.

Moreover this consciousness is not that of particular individuals, it is a universal rational consciousness which has won through to this insight; therefore its purpose in reforming the world will be a single, rational and universal one; there is no reason why the world should be the battlefield of different purposes, reason and universality will prevail.

From this springs the idea of creating a definitive, perfect human society by an act of common will, of bringing heaven down to earth (413) and establishing the absolute in the here and now. Now this attempt thinks Hegel is based on the same error mentioned above, that the Enlightenment doesn’t recognize significant reality outside man, and the sequel will show how disastrously this contradiction reveals itself.

Hegel plunges here into one of the most interesting passages of the PhG. The universal knowing subject who sees the whole world spread out as neutral objects whose workings it thoroughly understands, cannot but be seized by the ambition to transform this world according to universal reason. This is the idea of absolute freedom, freedom untrammelled by any obstacle, not even that of other wills, for the will in question is a universal will, hence that of all men in so far as they are free. ‘The world is [for this consciousness] simply its will, and this will is universal’ (415).

Moreover, this universal will should not be some putative consensus, arrived at by others for me. In this world of absolute freedom there should be no representation, but all should will together. Hegel is plainly referring here to the Rousseauian doctrine of the general will.

Now this dream of absolute freedom is impossible; and we have seen that the root reason is this, that it does not recognize an independent significant reality outside of its own will, and hence is doomed to self-destruction. The way in which this dialectic is worked out in this passage on the French Revolution is extremely interesting in that it shows the juncture between Hegel’s ontology and his political philosophy.

The dream of absolute freedom cannot tolerate any structures and differentiation in society whereby people would have different functions in relation to the state, or whereby the state would be divided into estates. And in fact we see in Rousseau’s Contrat Social the demand that there be no distinction between citizens as far as the legislative process is concerned, that all participate together and equally. There are, in Rousseau’s state no legislative structures (although there are executive structures allowed). But argues Hegel, this means that no working state can be created; because a working state requires that people occupy different functions; and he believes further, that for different functions to be properly filled, there must even be a differentiation into estates (Stände), that is, classes with particular functions and roles in the whole. In other words, to exist really in history, a human political community, even issuing from a general will, must be embodied in some institutions; but institutions mean differentiation, the inter-relationship of men who are differently related to power.

And this in turn means that each man must accept this structure and give it his loyalty, even though it exists independently of him to the extent that other men, other wills over which he has no control are fulfilling other functions which are equally essential to the whole and which affect his life as well. Not everything he lives can issue from his will, some things have to be accepted as given, and accepted with the same loyalty and identification as he would give to his own creations.

But this is the negation of the idea of absolute freedom; for according to this each man would will everything that the state did, would thus create by his will the totality of the political and social conditions in which he lived; and this is incompatible with the kind of continuing differentiating structure which gives each man his place and function.

It is obvious that we are on here to a vital debate of modern times which is far from finished. The Rouseauian ideal returns in our day in the demand for radical participatory democracy, for ‘unstructured discussion’, for spontaneous mass action. Nor does the Hegelian side of the argument have to be linked with particular Hegelian views, such as the belief in the necessity of estates, which are clearly untenable today.6 We shall discuss this more fully in Part IV. What should be pointed out here, however, is that Hegel’s view is one whose roots go deep in his ontology. The need of the human political community as a general will to be embodied in a differentiated state structure, is a fundamental ontological necessity for man as a vehicle of Geist.

As a result of this fundamental notion Hegel sees a necessity by which the aspiration to absolute freedom engenders the Terror. Since it can come to no positive realization, its only action can be to destroy: to destroy the existing constitution and estates first, and then when nothing else of the old remains to destroy, it is left only with the opposition between the universal will and that of particular individuals who are not aligned with it. Since its only action can be destructive it is driven forward to suppress these wills. But since there is no structure left, there is no mediation between these errant wills and that of the state, only an absolute opposition; and the state’s negation of these wills can be only the simple unmediated one of liquidation. And moreover this liquidation is deprived even of its dramatic power to shock, since what is being suppressed is (supposedly) nothing but the utterly inessential particular will. ‘It is thus the coldest, flattest death, with no more significance than cutting through a cabbage-head or throwing back a draught of water’ (PhG, 418—19).7

Moreover the existence of material to be liquidated is virtually a necessity. For the absolutely universal will is an abstraction; in fact the government is run by some group, some faction, which is a part of the whole, which has a particular view and which is opposed by others. While this faction reigns all others are declared to be the vehicles of particular wills. And even when there is no overt opposition, the theory of the general will requires that all will the actions of the state. It thus becomes a crime even to be alienated from the republic in one’s heart. But this alienation can be hidden, so the regime is driven to proceed against people even without overt opposition, but just on suspicion. (Hence Hegel tries to derive the famous loi des suspects.)

Hegel’s study of the Terror also touches a question that has a relevance beyond his time. The Stalinist terror had some of the same properties as those which Hegel singled out in the Jacobin one: liquidation become banal, the fastening on intentions and other subjective deviations, the self-feeding destructiveness.

In any case, for Hegel the drive to absolute freedom ends in the contradiction of the terror, a kind of destructive fury which destroys the individual it came to liberate. The result is on one level that the organized structured state reconstitutes itself (under Napoleon), although differently because the citizens have had the experience of being close to death, which as we saw above in the dialectic of the master and the slave brings them closer to the universal. From here Hegel could have derived the development of higher forms of the state.

But this is not his interest in the PhG; because here his main interest is to go through different forms of consciousness, particularly those which had a certain currency in his time, and show how they develop of themselves into his vision of things. He steps therefore from the Terror, not to another political form, but to a new type of retreat from politics which flows from it.

The Terror can be seen as the final culmination of alienation and formation (Bildung); for it involves a final sacrifice and negation of the self which goes way beyond previous ones in that it is the negation of the self as a reality simpliciter; it is not just a transformation of the self, from particular into servant of state power, for instance, but the suppression of the punctual individual himself. Moreover, this suppression does not come about through external necessity but through the universal will which it itself aspires to be.

The step beyond this contradiction which Hegel now takes is the interiorization of this drama. The new form of consciousness accepts that the universal will can only come to be by the suppression of the punctual individual will, and it now proceeds to bring this about inwardly, by resolving to live according to universal reason and hence renouncing its individual particularity.

A reversal has taken place. Instead of striving to ensure that its individual will effectively weighed in the universal, the new form of consciousness calls for a renunciation of one’s individual will, its mortification in order to give itself fully to the universal. From the political morality of the Contrat Social, we go to the morality of pure will of the Critique of Practical Reason.

We have here a transformation like that from the fight to the death to the relationship of master and slave, where the immediate negation of death is substituted for by a standing negation; or perhaps a closer analogy would be the step from the master-slave relation to the interiorization of this relation in Stoicism.

Thus absolute freedom leaves ‘its self-destroying reality’, and turns inward to a new moral consciousness. But this departure is also a geographical one. Absolute freedom ‘goes over into another land of self-conscious spirit’ (in ein anderes Land des selbstbewußten Geistes, PhG, 422); and clearly Hegel means this in a literal as well as a figurative sense. In the last section of the chapter on spirit we go from Revolutionary France to the awakening moral spirit of German philosophy.

3
The third part of the chapter on Geist takes us to Germany and to the movement of thought which started from Kant and developed through Fichte into German Romanticism. We seem to be returning here to figures already familiar from earlier chapters, in particular that on Reason.

But Hegel approaches these now as figures of a higher stage. We have ceased to deal with the subject as an individual only. Throughout the chapter on Spirit we have been dealing with the larger subject, that of a people or society, and with the individual in his relation to this. We are about to pass to the last chapter, on Religion, where we will examine what is really the self-understanding of cosmic Geist, although in a veiled and sometimes imperfect form. Here the individual in his religious consciousness is seen as the vehicle of the absolute subject. And there he reaches his fundamental identity, more fundamental than his identity as member of a society or people. For as the citizen is the vehicle of the larger life of the spirit of his people or society, so the different spirits of peoples (Volksgeister) in history can be seen as vehicles of the life of absolute spirit, who comes to self-consciousness in religion (as also in art and philosophy, as we shall examine below).

In this section on morality, we are making this transition from the spirit of a people or society expressed in their laws and institutions, (what Hegel calls later ‘objective spirit’) to absolute spirit. We are looking at views of the world in which the individual is – perhaps unwittingly – the vehicle of a larger self-consciousness. We are on the threshold of religion.

Hence when the section starts with a discussion of the moral philosophy of Kant and Fichte, which has already been severely dealt with in the previous chapter, it is the moral world-view (die moralische Weltanschauung) which is the central theme. This term is peculiarly appropriate to the views of Kant and Fichte, since both held to the primacy of practical reason. For Kant reason in its practical, i.e. moral, use was sovereign. It in no sense had to rely for its maxims on the deliverances of speculative reason. On the contrary, practical reason was able to show the necessity, as postulates, of important truths -concerning God, freedom, immortality – which speculative reason tried in vain to establish. Fichte, more radically, derived the whole structure of things from the demands of practical reason.

So that the world outlook of Kant and Fichte can be called moral. It is grounded on morality and flows from their moral views. But reciprocally, their morality requires completion in a world-outlook. Kant held that the postulates of practical reason concerning the existence of God and the immortality of the soul were inescapable, they were required by the demands of morality.

This need to complete a moral reasoning which is meant to be fully autonomous, which is meant to rely on no facts about the world or the will of God, by a kind of back stairs recourse to a supreme being and personal immortality, shows in Hegel’s view the fundamental inadequacy of Kant’s notion of the subject. What is on trial in these pages is the Kantian-Fichtean aspiration of radical moral autonomy in its extreme onesided form, where no concessions are made to the aspiration to unity with nature.

Hegel’s break with this goes back to the 1790s. In a sense this view was never his, although as we saw he espoused Kant in his early writings on Christianity without understanding fully what was involved. But very early on, while he still accepted Kant’s ideal of autonomous morality, Hegel was dissatisfied with the Kantian argument for the postulates of practical reason.8 For in fact these arguments reflect the profound dualism of Kant’s moral philosophy.

We have to postulate the existence of God because this is necessary for the realization of the supreme Good. The supreme good Kant defines as a condition where happiness or fulfilment (Glückseligkeit) is co-ordinated with virtue, that is, distributed among subjects according to their virtue. This notoriously fails to obtain now where the wicked frequently prosper and the good suffer. Nor is there any ground in nature which gives us hope of happiness and virtue coming into phase with each other in the future, for nature and the moral will are quite independent of each other. But we have to believe that the supreme good is possible if we are to be obliged to pursue it. Since only God as a higher power can bring about this harmony of dessert and reward, belief in God is a requirement of morality.

Now this argument is not only grounded on a radical separation of moral will and nature, but also a gulf between virtue and happiness. It is this very unGreek dichotomy which offended the young Hegel in the passage referred to above. The ancient warrior gave himself to the life and defence of his polis. This was his true virtue, but it was at the same time his fulfilment. Living beyond himself in the life of polis, living beyond his death through his fame among his people, this was happiness. He did not require payment for a virtue which was no reward in itself, some consolation (Trost) or compensation (Entschädigung). The need for this compensation arises from the degeneration (Verdorbenheit) of modern times. The man who has lost political virtue and defines himself as an individual sees death as a total loss. Where the ancient warrior was glad to die for his city and live in its memory, the modern can only envisage dying for the sake of the good as a terrible loss to be made good by the rewards in an after life.

Hence before we even look at Kant’s claim that the supreme good requires God, the very notion of the supreme good, of co-ordinating happiness and virtue supposes a profound division, in which the good and human fulfilment are utterly distinct and only contingently related. And this division is unacceptable to an expressivist vision of man, which found one of its models in the ancients.

Hegel in this part of the PhG attacks Kant’s postulates although the Kant-Fichte position is presented here without attribution in a reconstructed form in which the actual postulates identified do not correspond exactly with Kant’s. And he attacks them basically by showing how they spring from a profound dualism which Kant’s moral philosophy can neither escape nor accept. We start off with a moral will which is utterly distinct from nature, for if it were not, then it would not be fully autonomous, really drawing its maxims from itself. But at the same time, the harmony of morality and nature, of virtue and happiness, is seen as necessary, and hence has to be postulated as the work of God.

But the division is not only between morality and nature outside me, the course of things in the world. My moral will is also in opposition to nature in me, my desires, inclinations, etc. And this, too, is an opposition which must be overcome, since I am called on to fulfil my duty, act it out, make it real. And this will never be complete until my own nature has been made over to conform with the demands of duty, and I have a truly holy will. Hence the postulate of immortality which opens the prospect of endless progress towards a holiness which I cannot attain now in the sensible world.

Here is where the contradiction comes to the fore, Hegel thinks. The postulate of immortality is necessary because we have to surmount our initial predicament where moral will is opposed to nature. But this is not just an initial predicament, it is a necessary one for morality as Kant defines it. For the moral will is defined in opposition to inclination; should it fuse with natural desire, it would disappear.

for if it [sc. complete harmony of moral will and desire] really came to pass, the moral consciousness would be annulled. For morality is only a moral consciousness as the negative essence, in the face of whose pure duty sensibility has only a negative significance, the significance of what is not in conformity to it.

(PhG, 428)

Hence the idea of endless progress to perfection reflects a deep contradiction, a division of purpose. This unity of moral will and desire in a holy will seems called for, and yet were it to come it would put an end to morality. The compromise is to refer it to an indefinite future towards which we are always marching without ever arriving there. In the ‘dark distance of infinity’ (dunklen Ferne der Unendlichkeit), this contradiction is not too clearly discernible.

This is the contradiction of a dualist conception of man. We define what is essential to man, the moral will, in opposition to nature. We are at the farthest point of division. But this cannot be sustained. The subject is essentially embodied, and thus the moral will has to be reconciled with its embodiment, it has to be externally realized. Kant has an inkling of this, hence his doctrine of the supreme good and his postulates of practical reason. But he has debarred himself from bringing it off. For he has defined morality in terms of division, and hence the aspiration to realization of morality has to be contradictory. What would fulfil the moral will would abolish it.

This view is the fruit of the rigid thinking of the ‘understanding’ (Verstand) which holds fast to division and distinction, and cannot see that the divided terms also recover their unity. The understanding is a mode of thought which holds things fixed, sees them as either unchangingly distinct or identical. It is Reason (Vernunft) which can see how separation springs from identity and returns to it again.

Kant’s thought represents understanding in its most uncompromising mood. This is why he remains with division and cannot overcome it. Hence his thought must fall into contradiction with he tries to think the realization of morality. But the contradiction comes out at another point as well, when we try to give a content to moral obligation. In order to sàfeguard autonomy, Kant insists that the moral will be determined only by itself, that it draw its maxims not from some external fact or authority but from itself. Hence Kant argues, what makes a maxim of action morally binding cannot be anything to do with its substantive content, but only its form. It is when it has the form of universalizability, and thus reflects the rational will, that it is obligatory.

Hegel argues in many places that the Kantian formal criterion fails to yield any determinate result. He made this point in the chapter on reason, and also in other places.9 Many philosophers have, of course, argued that Kant’s criterion is empty. But for Hegel this defect springs from the same basic cause as the above contradiction, the dualism between moral autonomy and nature. Kant insists that the criterion be formal in order to safeguard the autonomy of the will. The will can turn only to reason as its guide. But Kant’s idea of reason is not the true one in which the Idea turns its opposite, Nature, and finds an embodiment which manifests it. Hence Kant’s notion of reason is abstract, purely formal. And just because of this cleaving to reason can tell us nothing about how to act. For Hegel, reason is bound up with the ontological structure of things, and this will provide the guidance we need to shape our moral action. But for Kant, reason is utterly distinct from the nature of things, just as moral will is from nature. It is thus purely formal, and just for this reason cannot provide any substantive guidance.

We thus fall into a second contradiction, that of moral duty, which Hegel now draws out. Man is bound by the pure principle of duty, to act according to universal rule. But in order to act, I have to see this general principle of duty instantiated in particular duties, particular acts I must do. But this is the gap that cannot be bridged. No particular act can ever be shown to be binding, because the principle of universalizability in fact can be satisfied by anything. Hegel sees the protagonists of the moral world-outlook here as having to introduce another postulate to bridge this gap, to have recourse to God again, this time to confer on our particular duties the quality of holiness that pertains to pure duty.

This latter postulate is rather dubiously attributable to Kant. But Hegel is not strictly interpreting Kant here (whose name never appears) but rather what he sees to be the inner logic of the moral world-outlook to which Kant and later Fichte gave expression. And his point here as elsewhere is that this vision is shot through with contradiction, in that it is founded on a division which it can neither accept nor overcome. And this contradiction always comes out in two places; when we consider the realization of morality, and when we try to give a determinate content to moral obligation.

The result of this contradiction is that this morality, which started off with the principle of autonomy as its central idea, is forced to have recourse to a deus ex machina. Its fulfilment is placed in a distant future in another world. Its present experience is one of division. It is another form of unhappy consciousness. As Hegel puts it here, we start off with the affirmation that there is moral consciousness. But when we see that this moral consciousness is in principle unreconciled with nature, and incapable of affirming of any particular act that it is really a duty, then we have to admit that among men, who are sensible beings who must realize themselves in particular acts, there is no moral consciousness. Or there is one but only in representation, and representation, moreover, which cannot become clear conceptual thought without showing up its contradictions.

This is the fate of any moral vision which divides morality from nature, which is concerned merely with what ought to be, and is not grounded on what is. How Hegel proposes to go beyond this we shall examine further in Part IV.

After a devastating ten-page passage (434-44) in which he works systematically through the contradictions of the moral world-outlook, and the shifts (Verstellungen) it goes through to avoid seeing them, Hegel goes on to a Romantic theory of conscience which grew in part out of Kant. This figure can be placed here because it grows at least partially out of a sense of what Hegel finds objectionable in Kant’s moral theory. The Romantics abandoned the austere Kantian division between inclination and morality, and came to a vision of a spontaneous moral intuition in which the law of the heart and the ethical law are one.

But this is not just a return to the earlier phase of subjective moral certainty described in the chapter on Reason. For here the subject is certain of his intuitions not just as an individual, but as one who is in touch with the universal, with God. For the Romantic conscience is a religious one. It rejoices in having overcome the gap not only between inclination and morality but also between man and God. The community of these consciences is the locus of God’s life (460). We thus have a vision which is close to Hegel’s.

But we saw in the first chapter how sharply Hegel differed from the Romantics for all the similarity in their aspirations. He could not accept the Romantic notion of an immediate unity with the universal, or the belief in intuition which aspires to a kind of ineffable encounter with God. This unity could only be brought about by Reason, which can bear negation and separation within the unity, and hence maintains clarity of vision.

Hegel’s critique of this theory starts from its individual inspirational character, which allows conscience to have any content at all provided someone feels the corresponding inspiration. But this is incompatible with the supposed nature of this conscience as the mouthpiece of the universal, whose inspirations are universally recognized, and thus bring about the universal recognition of the self who identifies with them. On the contrary, the actions which flow from these inspirations clash.

The result is a dialectical shift. We no longer see the expression of the pure conscience in external action, which can be a source of conflict, and which as external reality can always be seen from many points of view and judged from many standpoints. For instance, it can be seen as moral action by some because of one aspect, and as the height of selfishness by others because of another. Instead, the paradigm expression of conscience shifts to speech, which Hegel repeats here, is a form of external existence of Geist which nevertheless remains transparent, which doesn’t have the obtrusive many-sided nature of external reality which allows us to see something quite other and unintended in the latter. It is the transparent expression of the self, pure identity with self, but posed in objectivity (458).

Hence the spontaneously pure conscience turns from action to talk, to the expression in literature of its own inner convictions, but which it can never act out for fear of losing this sense of its purity and universality. This is the figure of the beautiful soul. It represents of course just another strategy of retreat, and Hegel makes short shrift of it. It brings about its own annihilation, and disappears ‘as a formless vapour, which dissolves itself in the air’ (als ein gestaltloser Dunst, der sich in Luft auflöst, PhG, 463).

But Hegel’s attitude towards the beautiful soul – whose portrait seems drawn here especially from Novalis – is much more ambiguous than the above would imply. For this figure reminds us of the Jesus of the Frankfurt MS on the ‘Spirit of Christianity’, and we thus recall that Hegel did not always judge the beautiful soul this harshly.

Rather, Hegel shows the importance which this phase of thought had for him in all but making the transition of absolute knowledge through a reflection on the dilemma of purity versus efficacy. This occupies the rest of the chapter, and prepares the passage to absolute knowledge, although we will first have to trace this higher, religious vision from its very beginning.

The dilemma of purity arises inescapably out of our relation as particular existents to the universal. Man acts as an individual, and his individuality is inevitably mixed up in his action. Even the most altruistic act with the greatest universal significance is one in which the agent found some kind of satisfaction, and which is coloured in some way with his particular subjectivity. This, we have already seen, is one of the fundamental Hegelian ideas, that all spiritual reality to be must be embodied, and embodiment is in some time and place, hence particular. Geist can only be by being embodied in finite spirits which are particular. The price of existence is thus particularization.

To attempt to hold the universal free of the particular in order to maintain its purity, as the beautiful soul does, is to condemn it to non-existence. Universal values have to accept as it were the sacrifice of being embodied in particular lives in order to be realized. But at the same time the particular must sacrifice itself. The particular is the mortal, we have seen; all particular things die or disappear. But the particular man must as it were die inwardly in order to attain the universal; he must recognize that what is essential in his action is the embodiment of universal Geist, and recognize that the particular features of its embodiment in his life are what is inessential and hence doomed to pass away. He should be already reconciled to this passing away, that is not putting his essential interest and identification in these particular features.

This reciprocal necessity for sacrifice of universal and particular Hegel presents here in the last pages on Geist in the form of a kind of dialogue between two of the stages we have just seen, the pure conscience which is sure of itself and acts, and the beautiful soul which wants above all to maintain the purity of the universal. The passage is called evil and its pardon. Why evil? Because the particular and its affirmation is the essence of evil, for it is that which cuts men off from the universal. But this evil is unavoidable, for Geist must be embodied, and this means particularization. This notion of the necessity of evil underlies Hegel’s interpretation of the doctrine of original sin. The sin is original not in some quasi-historical sense, but in that particular existence is fundamental to finite spirit, and finite spirits must be for spirit to be, and yet their finitude is what creates the division that has to be overcome; it is the essence of sin which divides man from God. The unity of God with man can thus only be achieved by a reconciliation arising out of a state of sin; there must be evil, particular existence, but this is overcome through man negating it, living beyond it, or in theological terms, asking forgiveness for it; and in so doing, he rejoins the universal life of Geist, and is thus pardoned.

This reciprocal necessity is brought out in the dialogue of two consciences: that representing the universal starts out taking the active particular conscience to task for its betrayal of the universal. It accuses it of bending the universal to its own purposes because it can always descry some individual interest in any act undertaken by the active conscience. It thus accuses its interlocutor of hypocrisy, of being moral in word only. This outlook is of course pretty distasteful to Hegel and he comes right back in reply: since the beautiful soul cannot bring itself to embody the universal law in act, which by its nature it demands to be, it is this conscience of which we can say rather that its service to morality is purely verbal, and that it is hypocritical. Hegel makes clear his disapproval of this position by throwing in extra insults – quoting the Napoleonic dictum: ‘il n’y a pas de heros pour son valet de chambre’; then adding, not because the first is not a hero, but because the other is nothing more than a valet de chambre (467–8).

The solution is that both sides admit their wrong and their need for the other. The particular agent must ask forgiveness, that is, no longer set store by his particularity. But at the same time the universal must give this forgiveness, that is accept that it cannot be except by this particular agent and hence that it is bound to forgive. The result is a new consciousness, the highest unity in opposition of particular and universal. We are on the verge of passing over into absolute knowledge; for we have a particular subject ready to give up and live beyond his particularity, and a universal which is now seen not as being totally beyond but as needing the particular.

What remains to be done is to set out this ontological vision of Geist which must be embodied and return to itself. This speculative philosophy will give us. But this vision is also contained in a less transparent form in religion. The self-knowledge of the absolute has developed in the religious evolution of mankind. Hence the last chapter before the conclusion will be on religion; and in keeping with the practice of the whole work we will start from the bottom, from the beginning, with the religion of nature.

 

 

1 As Hegel remarks earlier in the PhG, ‘Die Vernunft muß aus diesem Glücke heraustreten ‘(258).

2 The explanation has also been given (Cf. Fr. Rosenzweig, Hegel und der Staat, Munich and Berlin 1920, I, 217–20, II, 1–5) that Hegel under the impact of Napoleonic conquest abandoned for a time the belief that Geist can return to full reconciliation with itself in a modern state, which had been one of his earlier aspirations and was certainly part of his mature system after 1815. On this interpretation, history for Hegel in this period would reach its culmination and Spirit its reconciliation only in religion and philosophy. But this cannot be convincingly established.

3 Hegel’s words (deliberately) remind us of Antigone’s:

 

The immutable unwritten laws of Heaven

They were not born today or yesterday

They die not; and none knoweth whence they sprang.

 

4 In one of his early unpublished MSS of the 1790s, Hegel gave a Montesquieuian account of the breakdown of the polis in terms of growing polarization between rich and poor. Nohl 214–31.

5 Hegel is thus characterizing here what I call in the first chapter the modern ‘self-defining’ subject.

6 And nor should we identify it with the baroque end-of-Raj constructions of Hegel’s British follower Bradley with his notion of ‘my station and its duties’.

7 ‘Er ist also der kälteste, platteste Tod, ohne mehr Bedeutung als das Durchhauen eines Kohlhaupts oder ein Schluck Wassers.’

8 Cf. Nohl 70–1.

9 E.g. in the paper of the early Jena period ‘Über die wissenschaftlichen Behandlungsarten des Naturrechts’ in Schriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie, Ed. Lasson, pp. 349 ff., also PR § 258, and SW, XIX, 588–96.

 
    