## CHAPTER XII
## The Concept
 

 

Having reached the subject, Hegel is now in a position to spell out what has only been implicit in the earlier books. We saw that the categories of Essence as against those of Being make implicit reference to a subject of knowledge. This reference is now made explicit. And this consciousness that the real is for a subject will no longer be lost sight of in the Logic.

This is the first justification for calling this section the book of the Concept. That the world is for a subject means that the world-as-object-of-knowledge is structured by concepts. This was intrinsic to our starting point in the Logic, which is a dialectic of categories, but it is now to be examined explicidy. And it shows Hegel’s debt to Kant. But while Hegel’s notion of the Concept owes a lot to Kant, it involves a profound transformation of Kant’s basic ideas.

Hegel takes the basic Kantian idea of the original unity of apperception which he says ‘belongs to the deepest and most accurate insights that can be found in the critique of reason’ (WL, II, 221) and gives it a twist which Kant would have received with horror. This original unity is what unites the different representations, and it is this unity which gives them objectivity, i.e., relates them to an object. As just intuitions, the contents of our experience have no objectivity, but as brought together by the ‘I’, and brought together under concepts, they achieve objectivity. Through being conceived, they become posited reality, and not simply immediately given.

All this is Kantian. But Hegel gives it a totally different meaning. Where Kant went wrong, he says, was that he thought of this unity of the object in the thought of transcendental apperception as simply phenomenon, as set over against the thing in itself, which was unknowable. And in line with this basic idea, the Kantian notion of the category was of a simple form, which without content would be empty. This form thus had to be filled with external intuition in order to generate real knowledge, knowledge of (phenomenal) objects.

For Kant, therefore, the operation of the Concept had to wait on the reception of intuitive filling. It presupposed sensible intuition; it operated on this intuition, which had to be given beforehand. In Hegelian terms, we have here an ascent which has not yet turned around and recognized that the lower is produced out of the higher, that it is not self-subsistent.

The issue between Kant and Hegel is this: Hegel takes up Kant’s idea that reality or objectivity is only where the stuff of sensible intuition is structured by thought. But whereas for Kant this principle was valid only for our knowledge of the world, i.e., for phenomena, and not for things in themselves; for Hegel this is valid ontologically; For the inner truth of things is that they flow from thought, that they are structured by rational necessity. What for Kant just happens to be true of our faculty of knowledge is for Hegel an ontological fact which finds its reflection in our faculty of knowledge. All this he feels he has shown in the preceding parts of the Logic. For these have demonstrated that the conceptions of reality as separate from and over and against thought, as simple being, as hidden essence, as just given, etc. are all inadequate, and all go over into substance whose truth is manifest necessity, or freedom, hence concept.

But then the other side to knowledge besides the concept, viz., its intuitive filling, is not given separately, it is produced out of, posited by the Concept. This is where Kant went wrong. But all that he said about objectivity, its dependence on thought and the unity of the ‘I’, which he intended only for phenomenal objectivity, turns out to be right of reality as such.

So obviously we are dealing with Concept in a very different sense than in Kantian philosophy, or indeed, common sense. For the latter, the concept is a tool of our knowing, a way we have of grasping reality. Our use of it is, as it were, without prejudice to the nature of reality itself. For Hegel, on the other hand, the Concept is an active principle underlying reality, making it what it is.

The second connected difference is this: that for common sense, the concept is an abstraction. Its universality is bound up with this. We find a word which applies to a host of similar instances, and the concept does this by abstracting from their particularities. But on Hegel’s view, the Concept is such that it develops the reality which corresponds to it out of itself. For it is not just a content in our minds, but the principle underlying the real. Hence it is a universal, but one which has the difference within it. As Hegel puts it, it produces the particularities which are its manifestations out of itself ‘the Concept [is] ground and source of all finite determinateness and multiplicity’ (WL, II, 227).

Hence for Hegel, the best representation of the Concept in the furniture of the world is the T’. I may have particular concepts, ‘but “I” is the pure Concept itself, which as Concept has come to existence’ (Dasein, WL, II, 220). For ‘I’ as Hegel explains is a unity which is self-identical, and can abstract from all particular determination in order to concentrate on its self-identity. It is thus universal. But at the same time, it is particularity, different from others, individual personality. The point is that the particular characteristics of the ‘I’ are not merely given, but belong to a being who is also capable of abstracting from them and making them over, who is free in the sense of having an identity which is beyond any of them. Hence these characteristics can be seen as affirmed by this universal self-identity. At the same time, while free from any of these characteristics, the ‘I’ is not free from having some; it cannot be without affirming some character or other, hence the universal must issue in the particular.

Finite spirit is thus the clearest readily available manifestation of the Concept. But it is not the highest. For a particular finite spirit cannot disengage itself from its characteristic and change them totally. In Hegel’s own theory, the only really adequate representation of the Concept must be infinite spirit, as represented in the whole system of reality. However, among finite entities, finite spirit is obviously the best, followed later by living beings.

The Concept is thus the universal which develops particularity out of itself. This development is contrasted with the simple transition (Übergehen) of Being, or the reflection (Scheinen) of Essence. In the first, the first term disappears to make way for the second. In Essence, the first refers us to a second which is not itself; but in the Concept, the new terms developed out of it remain fully identical with it. The image Hegel uses in the EL (§161, Addition) is that of a plant growing. This develops and articulates itself. It is at first simply the undifferentiated source of the later unfolding. This is Concept in the other Hegelian sense of the germ or undeveloped form. This undifferentiated source is hence like the universal, which is abstract, undifferentiated. But it contains the power, indeed the necessity, to grow and develop and to produce the particular out of it.

The question naturally arises, and Hegel takes it up in EL (§ 160, Addition), why we even use the same word here for what we ordinarily call concept, and for Hegel’s Concept. Does this not simply invite misunderstanding and confusion? The short answer is that the two notions, the ordinary language and the Hegelian specialist one, are not as far apart as we might think. But the deeper answer which comes in the sequel is that the Hegelian Concept will be shown to develop out of the ordinary one in the course of the dialectic to follow.

For in the book we are now starting our task will be to move in the opposite direction to that of objective logic. There we started with the poorest, least contentful notion of external reality and led it through Essence up to a vision of this external reality as manifestation of the Concept. But if this is so, if everything really does issue out of the Concept, like the plant out of the seed, then we should be able to show this by examining the Concept itself. Of course, the Concept which is the source of all is the fully developed Concept, the Idea, which we shall come to at the end of our search. But if this is really the source of all, we should be able to get to it starting from the concept in something like the ordinary sense, the subjective concept which is the stuff of thought.

Our basic ontological vision is that the Concept underlies everything as the inner necessity which deploys the world, and that our conceptual knowledge is derivative from this. We are the vehicles whereby this underlying necessity comes to its equally necessary self-consciousness. Hence the concept in our subjective awareness is the instrument of the self-awareness of the Concept as the source and basis of all, as cosmic necessity. But if this is so, then the concept in our minds must on closer examination turn out to function like the Concept at the root of reality. This latter produces reality out of itself, it is the universal which goes over into the particular, it is the inner formula of necessity which generates an external reality which, as external, both negates and manifests this necessity; it posits its own opposite with which it remains inseparably united. It is the totality which moves by contradiction. Unless the concept in our minds turns out on deeper examination to function like this, unless it too goes over into opposition and an identity mediated by its other, unless indeed it turns out ultimately to link up with the thought underlying reality, then Kant and the dualists are right: there must in fact be an unbridgeable gulf between our thought and the foundations of the real. The conceptual necessity underlying what is would not be within the grasp of subjective thought, but only at best through an intuition beyond thought, in image, hint, symbol. Geist as reason would never come to self-consciousness.

In a sense, we have been showing all along in this examination of our categorial concepts that they generate contradiction and are linked to their opposites. But we should be able to show this in the very concept of a concept itself.

This is what we are going to do in the first part of this third book of the Logic. We are going to look at our thought, that is, at concepts, and what we make with them, viz. judgements and syllogisms. In short we are going to look at much of what usually is studied under the head of formal logic. This is the point where Hegel’s Logic (which we must remember is principally a transcendental logic) is congruent with what usually goes under the title. And we have seen why in the strategy of that transcendental logic this matter has to be taken up here.

But it also follows from the foregoing that Hegel cannot really accept the idea of a formal logic, that is: a study which would claim to be of the form of thought in abstraction from content. The whole Hegelian message is that ‘form’, or the nature of thought itself, goes over into its opposite. Concepts reveal on examination inner contradictions; as universals they show themselves necessarily related to particulars which nevertheless negate them. And in showing these inner contradictory relations they are really showing forth the nature of things, for our concepts behave like this because they are the vehicles of self-consciousness of the inner necessity of the cosmos. Hence a study of concepts as pure forms generates the basic structure of things, or the content. Reciprocally, of course, a study of content, of things, reveals the inner conceptual necessity, or form.

Hence a purely formal logic is a chimaera. In a crucial passage (WL, II, 229–34, also EL, § 162), Hegel expresses this point through a discussion of his notion of truth. The usual (and Kantian) idea of formal logic is that it treats of concepts and propositions in abstraction from their (substantial) truth. That is, they may have logical truth, but not truth in the ordinary sense of adequacy to the facts. Truth requires two terms. But if our study of forms shows them as issuing in an inner development which reflects the structure of things, then the question of substantive truth arises within so-called formal logic itself. In other words, there is no separate domain of forms which are only susceptible of being judged as coherent or incoherent, as we judge a proposition as making sense or not, abstracting from all questions of truth as concerning only the agreement of this form with a quite independent empirical content. Rather, because the forms themselves undergo inner development out of their internal contradictions until they come properly to reflect the structure of things, the question of their truth necessarily arises. They are in truth only in their fully developed form. In any earlier form they are inadequate, untrue.

Substantive truth thus cannot be excluded from the domain of formal logic, which is another way of saying that formal logic fits into transcendental logic, which itself is ontology. The truth of something is within that thing, or within the concept of the thing. For everything is an emanation of Concept, hence it is either in agreement or disagreement with it, hence either true or false. Truth in the sense of Hegel’s absolute Idealism is the form of something when it is fully developed, for then it is in full agreement with its concept.

This whole section expresses once again the profound difference from Kant; that Kant accepted the duality of knowing mind and ultimate reality; that ultimate truth, truth in the sense of adequacy of thought to ultimate reality, remains beyond our reach. Whereas for Hegel, truth is within our grasp, because reality is not foreign to thought, rather it develops out of thought itself. For Kant categories are finite because they are subjective, for Hegel they are finite because they are partial, they have their place in the whole process, and have to go under each in their turn.

Finally what Hegel reproaches Kant for is not having cleaved to the notion of an intellectual intuition, which he himself invented. This would be an understanding which unlike ours did not have to depend on external reception, on being affected from outside, for its contents, but created them with its thought. This archetypical intellect Kant attributed to God; it was quite beyond us. But God’s intellect is ultimately revealed to us for Hegel, it only lives in our thought. Hence we can participate in an intellectual intuition. God’s thought is ours.

### I: SUBJECTIVITY
The first division of the subjective logic is called ‘Subjectivity’, and its aim is to lead us through the concept considered as subjective grasp of things to the notion of a self-articulating world. Rather, we are already there, for we have achieved this notion through the development out of Essence. But we are going to show that we get to the same spot by going in the other direction, and starting with the concept by which we know things, as we did starting with the being known.

In the course of doing this, we will come to grips with some of the notions of formal logic, and in the process transpose the whole set of ideas connected with this discipline. We shall take the fixed distinctions and set them in motion. In the general introduction to this book, the part in which he gives its division (Einteilung), Hegel tells us what we shall be dealing with in this division: (WL, II, 236).

Starting off with the Concept an sich, we see it as something purely inner, and hence as simply outer. We start off thinking of the concept as the property of subjective thought only (as inner); and for this reason it is thought of as only outwardly related to what it is a thought of. And the various elements of this thought (the particular concepts) are only outwardly related to each other. But the identity of the Concept will set them in dialectical movement, and will overcome their fragmentation and the division of Concept from reality (Sache).

This first segment of the Logic of the Concept goes through three parts, the Concept as such, judgement, and syllogism. These are the stages on the road which will lead to objectivity, that is, will take us beyond subjective Concept once more to the self-articulated totality of the real.

The best way to expound what goes on in this first chapter on Concept is to set out the articulation of the Hegelian notion, and see how the ordinary subjective one fits in. This is close to Hegel’s own procedure, at least in the fuller exposition of WL; (except that Hegel considers the two frequently together without distinguishing them for long passages, which hardly adds to clarity).

The exposition of this chapter goes by the deployment of the well known distinction between universal (Allgemeines) specific (Besonderes) and particular (Einzelnes) which obviously gets a special twist at Hegel’s hands.

Concept
First, let us take the Hegelian Concept. This is a universal, a self-identical inner principle of a diversified totality. But it is also sundered into many, for there must be differentiation for there to be totality. This sundering is the specificity which falls under the universal.1

But then, thirdly, this totality has to have real, external existence, and as such to be a real particular thing, Einzelnes (sometimes better translated ‘individual’).

Unlike the earlier spheres, the development here is purely intrinsic. Each of these three moments is itself the whole totality, as Hegel says. That is, one cannot give an account of it without mentioning the others as well. Thus in starting off with the universal, we had to mention that it was the inner principle of a diversified totality, and hence refer to the other two ‘determinations’ (Bestimmungen). All three are inseparably linked.2

But now, as we have seen earlier, this ideal scenario is not everywhere embodied as such. It is in the whole which is the embodiment of infinite spirit. And it is in those particular entities which are closest in nature to infinite Geist, viz. Life, the ‘I’, finite spirits (WL, II, 244). But even in these particular entities, it is not realized as it is in the whole, for here its self-specification flows from its ‘creative power’ (schöpferische Macht, 244–5), and is thus unconditioned by anything else.

Another image of the Concept is the genus, which specifies itself in its species. But already here, we are coming to an example of less perfect realization. For the ordinary genus groups a diverse set of species which does not follow any necessary articulation which can be deduced from its Concept. The genus of birds includes a whole row of species neither whose number nor whose differentiae show any necessity whatever.

This contingency finds a place in Hegel’s system, as we have seen, for on his view the lower realizations of the Idea contain this kind of imperfection, of looseness of fit, which is from another point of view contingency. Thus speaking about the contingency of species Hegel says

This is the impotence of nature, not to be able to hold fast to and present the rigour of the Concept, but rather to disperse [verlaufen] into this concept-less and blind multiplicity.

(WL, II, 247)

This falling into simple diversity of nature is matched by a similar production of diversity in the representations (Vorstellungen) of finite spirit. Both the manifold natural genera and species and the arbitrary ideas (Einfälle) of the mind

show indeed everywhere traces and hints [Spuren und Ahnungen] of the Concept, but they do not present it in its true image, because they are the side of its free self-externality... (WL, II, 248)

But this contingency is itself contained in the Concept

it is absolute power precisely because it can leave its difference free to take the shape of independent diversity, external necessity, contingency, caprice, opinion; all of which, however, must not be taken for anything more than the abstract side of nullity (Nichtigkeit, loc. cit.)

Imperfection thus takes this form, that the universal, which is here the genus, does not issue necessarily in its specification, that this specification has a great deal of the arbitrary, of the simply contingent, in it, around the basic structure of necessity. And this lack of necessity can be seen in another way as well, that the different species, the different parts of its specification, are not internally related as opposites to each other. They show no necessary articulation, as we saw above. Necessary articulation for Hegel can only be the essential relation of opposites, whereby each reposes on its other, so that each cannot be without the other, which is in this sense its other. As contradictory they become a whole in movement, whose necessary articulation these parts are. This for Hegel is the true Genus, which would have thus only two species which would be essentially related opposites. Such is the absolute which necessarily sunders itself into spirit and nature, which in turn while opposed can only be conceived in relation to each other.

Hence the imperfection of the embodiment can be seen as a contingency in the issuing of specification from the universal, or as a contingency, a lack of opposition, in the mutual relations of the specified elements. But it can also be seen from the point of view of particularity: that the genus as a whole does not make an ordered particular; rather a contingent number of particulars fall under it.

Contrast again the absolute and the genus of birds, if this does not sound too ridiculous. The former is an articulated sundering into a totality which is also a real, self-moving external existent, or individual. Finite spirits approach this, but they do not suffice to themselves, rather the spirit which underlies them is embodied also in an ordered society of such spirits. But here enters an element of contingency in that the number of human beings is not fixed by necessity; only the society is a self-subsistent whole whose number is fixed at one (for any given stage). The contingently numbered particulars fit into a larger, and necessarily articulated particular.

But with the different species of birds, not even this is the case. There is an ‘undetermined multitude’ (unbestimmte Menge) of them, that is, both species and specimens, and yet the whole which is the Genus does not even make an articulated totality. As a particular, the genus of birds is an utterly ungainly entity. So that the unitary, articulated existent falls out of close inner relation to the universal under which it falls: the whole extension of the universal no longer qualifies, and what does qualify exists in undetermined number, and with much contingent articulation.

Now as we saw earlier, Hegel puts the imperfect embodiment of the Concept in nature into parallel with the contingent representations of the mind. And, as we shall now see, the purely subjective concept suffers from the same disabilities as the imperfectly embodied Concept. In this sense it has a certain justification, which it loses, though, when it claims to be the whole truth of Concept, which is what happens with common sense and philosophies of the understanding.

Let us see this by looking now at the subjective concept in relation to the three terms above. The subjective concept is a universal, in an unproblematic sense: it is indeed that for which ‘universal’ was first coined. But it also has specification, that is, there are criteria by which it is applied, it has some content, in this sense. The idea of a simple concept, one with no further criteria, Hegel rejects out of hand. It is to confuse representation with conceiving. There can be simple representations which swim before our minds. Even the richest realities, Spirit, nature, the world, even God, can be represented in the mind as utterly simple; that is, we can avoid going into their articulation. (WL, II, 255, also EL, § 164). But if we talk seriously of conceiving, then surely we cannot accept these as concepts. They are simple representations in which the universality is thought in abstraction from the specificity and particularity (loc. cit.).

Translating Hegel out of his own language, we come to a thesis which would be widely accepted today:3 a concept is necessarily bound with other concepts: no concept can be introduced on its own. We cannot be said to have a concept of a thing if we can say nothing about this thing except to apply this concept to it. This is the point behind Wittgenstein’s argument against a private language:4 the sensation ‘E’ would have to be such that at least we could say that it was a sensation, and hence link it to the rest of our language. There is no concept we can deploy which is not so linked and hence which cannot in some way be explicated by others.

The belief in the simple concept belongs to another theory of meaning, that in which words were given significance simply by linking them to sense contents. Then the word which was linked to an utterly simple sense content would itself be incapable of further articulation. But Hegel points out that this kind of distinction confuses psychology with logic. There can perhaps be simple sensuous presentations, even representations in the mind: as a matter of autobiographical fact, I might see that I had not noticed before the articulation of a given scene, or even a given idea. But when one comes to concepts, this notion of simplicity is totally misplaced.

Thus the universal (concept) must have a specification (its criterial explication). But as with the imperfect embodiments above, the merely subjective concept will be such that there is no necessary link between the two. Of course, there will be a purely analytic link, in that this concept’s meaning is what is given in the criterial explication. But there will be nothing necessary to the articulation of this explication; its elements will be quite contingently linked. In giving the explication of ‘parrot’, we will speak of a bird, which has certain colours, a certain kind of beak, which can ‘talk’, etc. But all these characteristics are quite contingendy linked together. There is no necessity in their being the articulations of a single thing; they do not form a totality.

Thirdly, the universal concept with its specification is used to designate particulars. As in the exposition of the ontological Concept, the moment of particularity is the moment where we come to external, real existence. But in the case of the subjective concept, the step into reality is one that goes beyond the subjective, it is the reference to things in the world.

Thus universal, specific, particular are present in the subjective concept, its specification, and the things to which it can be used to refer.

And as in the case of the explication above, the purely subjective concept shows the same contingency or externality of relations between particular and concept, as between concept and explication. It is part and parcel of the same contingency. This contingency is analogous to the imperfect embodiments of the Idea in Nature which we discussed above. The perfect embodiment is one which has a necessarily articulated totality as its specification, and this is thus necessarily a particular which properly understood goes back of itself into its universal qua articulated. The imperfectly embodied Concept has no necessary articulation. Its extension is thus not a particular, and the particulars which fall under it are of contingent number and variety. Reciprocally, this whole extension does not show of itself the universal to which it belongs and nor do the constituent particulars.

Similarly, the simply subjective concept is only contingently, or analytically, united to its explication; and it is only contingent that it has particulars which fall under it, or how many. Reciprocally, these particulars are not such that they essentially must be characterized by this universal, they can be subsumed under a host of different, unrelated concepts. The parrot is also a blue object, one which makes noise, etc. On the other hand, the spiritual entity deploys all its different properties so that all are manifestations of the same inner necessity. Whatever term one chooses to start with, one is referred beyond to the whole.

In Hegel’s terms, the subjective concept is such that its form and content are not united, (WL, II, 261), or else we can say that they are just immediately united. The latter expression perhaps best describes the relation between concept and specification. For these are analytically united, hence represent no conceptual unity in the strong sense. There is no mediation in this link, simply a spelling out what is involved in the concept.

But the former expression perhaps best suits the relation between concept and particular. The concept is the form, the particular thing the content; and they are contingently or externally related in so far as the concept does not itself determine its particulars, and these do not of themselves prescribe their characterization.

This is the purely subjective concept, as it is seen by common sense and philosophy of the understanding. It is a mere form which is separate from content; and which is obtained by abstracting from the content, that is, from the difference that different particulars have which fall under it. The concept is thus seen as containing simply the common elements among the things that fall under it.

In part this notion of the common element (das bloß Gemeinschaftliche, EL, § 163, Addition 1, also WL, II, 263) stems from a false notion of the concept as the product of abstraction, fruit of the same psychologizing theory of meaning which yielded the idea of the simple concept. But in part it corresponds to a real distinction; for the inessential characterizations of things or the characterizations of inessential things yield the simply common. It is common to all men that they have ear-lobes, but this does not give their essential characterization. We need to distinguish the universal Concept, that which really produces what falls under it, from the simply common, which has no intrinsic relation to the things it relates, does not produce them, and is simply noticed by external comparison.

In the first Addition to EL, § 163, Hegel gives two important instances of this distinction. The Greeks he claims did not really have a concept of the universal of either God or man. Hence they could believe that Hellenes were radically different from barbarians, and that some men were naturally slaves. Christianity brought the principle of the universal to its full recognition, which is why there is no slavery in modern Europe.

Secondly this can also illuminate Rousseau’s distinction between la volonté generale and la volonté de tous: the latter is the simply common, the former would better be called the concept of will.

The point of all this, as Hegel explains in Addition 2, is that the Concept comes first, as we understand in the ontological version, and as is always overlooked in the subjective version. This is the truth behind the idea that God created the world ex nihilo.

It is clear from the foregoing that the subjective concept as understood by common sense is not just wrong. In its inessentiality, its purely contingent relation to what it covers, which could as well not have existed, or could have been easily subsumed under other concepts, it corresponds to much that is contingent and inessential in the world; the contingent in the imperfectly embodied (ontological) Concept. Where this subjective view is hopelessly wrong is in not seeing that this inessentiality is itself posited by the essentially creative Concept. And this is to say that its failure is to ignore the very existence of the ontological Concept. Hence it believes that all concepts are subjective, that they are all forms which are separate from content.

We want to show now that this subjective version of the Concept transcends itself by the force of its inner contradictions. But as often in crucial transitions, Hegel seems to be assuming what he means to prove. For the basic contradiction here is the ‘incommensurability’ (Unangemessenheit) of the universal and its specification (WL, II, 252). But this inadequacy only holds if we assume that the lack of inner connection constitutes inadequacy.5 Understanding, says Hegel, manages to achieve the fixity of the universal out of the flux of the changing sensible. This is quite an achievement; it is too much to expect of it that it go beyond this to see that its own fixed universal concepts are themselves in dialectic flux. But these fixed notions, these particular determinate concepts, which are held to be separate from each other, go themselves over into dialectical movement from the force of their own inner contradictions. But these contradictions turn on the incommensurability of determination to universal, which itself is a requirement of the system. Ordinary understanding is quite satisfied with determinate concepts, where there is no essential relation in the articulation or to the particulars which fall under it, and cannot be made to feel the contradiction.

But Hegel’s derivation of objectivity is not just based on the simple fact of incommensurability (Unangemessenheit). It takes off from the concept to pass through a long development by means of other logical notions. The first is judgement. The transition comes out of this conclusion that in Subjective Concept, the particular which falls under it is external to it. And yet it is not without relation. We are not back in the sphere of Being, where we were dealing with simple entities on their own, and which simply went over into another. Nor are we in Essence where we were dealing with hidden reality. We are in the Concept where the particular has been derived as coming out of the Concept, as that which is referred to by the Concept. Hence we are thinking of the particular here as the object of reference. And as such, though separate from the Concept, it is also inseparably connected to it. Thus particularity ‘excludes the universal from itself, but since this is a moment of itself, this universal is also essentially related to it’ (WL, II, 264).6

Judgement
Thus the subjective concept, by referring to particulars which are not produced out of it, essentially refers us to the judgement. A concept can have no use except in the making of a judgement. This is the short way to this conclusion which dispenses with the whole argument of this section, except of course that this argument is essential to the Hegelian purpose which is to see the subjective concept against a background of requirements which are posed by the ontological Concept. From this point of view, it is not only important that we could not have concepts without judgements, that concepts are essentially what we use to make judgements, that they are not entities like stones which have a reality outside their use. Rather what is important is that the judgement is born out of a division, a diremption, where the two sides are not in full agreement, for this is what will power the development of the judgement as we see in the next section.

Judgement is joined to the idea of division for Hegel, of a splitting apart of the two terms which are joined. And this is aided and abetted by another word-play which the German language offers him on a platter. The movement of particularity is the original separation of itself (‘die ursprüngliche Teilung seiner’), and this is judgement (Urteil). The movement of diremption, or Entzweiung, which underlies everything, and which is later matched by the return to unity, is what underlies the judgement, where different things are declared the same. This we shall follow in detail in the dialectic which now ensues.

The discussion of Judgement helps to make clearer what for Hegel is the relation of formal logic to his kind. The usual idea of common sense is to see judgements as activities of our (finite) minds, in which we attribute some property to an object. We join two concepts in our minds; and the judgement is correct if the things we talk about with these concepts are really joined in fact. But for Hegel, judgement is first and foremost an ontological reality. In EL, § 166, Addition, he cites the favourite example of the plant: this comes from the seed and unfolds out into root, twigs, leaves, etc. This external unfolding into differentiated reality is the equivalent as we saw above to the universal which sunders itself into its specifications. But this sundering is the judgement (Urteil = ursprüngliche Teilung), as Hegel reminds us again. Hence this unfolding is to be seen as ‘das Urteil der Pflanze’ (366). Judgement is thus, first, the ontological reality whereby the Concept sunders itself and issues in particular realities.

This is what underlies the judgement in our minds and speech. We might think of judgement thus as a putting together (Verbindung) of two separate concepts, but this is quite wrong; it fails to take account of the fact that judgement is at bottom separation, partition of the unity.

There is, of course, another view of judgement as the separation of unity, which is also current in common sense. When we judge that the rose is red we cut apart in our minds by abstraction what in reality is the indivisible reality red-rose and think it in two parts or aspects which we join by judgement. But this view too errs by subjectivity. It is not totally wrong, but it misses a crucial dimension, that we do this act of separation as the inner reflection of the ontological act which is original (ursprünglich).

But of course not all judgements are really true to this ontological act. Hence there are different types of judgement. But it is important to realize that it is not just various forms of subjective judgement which are not true to ontological judgement; Reality, too, as we have seen, is more or less truly a reflection of the basic ontological sundering of concept. The more external it is, the more approximate, inexact, the more mixed with contingency. Hence there will be imperfect, ‘untrue’ judgements, which correspond to untrue realities.

‘Untrue’ is the word to use here, for we have seen that truth in Hegel is correspondence to the idea. Hence we shall be concerned throughout this section with something quite different from what is ordinarily called the truth of judgement, viz., its correspondence to the (often quite contingent) facts. This correspondence Hegel calls ‘Richtigkeit’, Tightness, correctness. A judgement can thus be correct, but what is applies to untrue: e.g., that someone is sick, or someone has stolen something (EL, § 172, Addition). This content is untrue, because in both cases the reality fails to conform to its concept; it is as it should not be.

But just as some contents can be characterized as untrue, so we can characterize judgements which bear on them as true or untrue, not in virtue of their correctness, but in virtue of their kind of object. And we can go further and distinguish different judgement-types, by their capacity to convey truth, that is, to bear on true objects. This will be a formal study, in that we will be dealing with judgement-classes, abstracting from their determinate content. But it will most emphatically not be formal in the usual sense as abstracting from the type of content, for the different judgement-types will be discriminated precisely on the basis of what they can say about the world.

We can thus think of a categorization of judgements on a scale which represents a successive approximation to judgements which have true objects, that is, objects which are in conformity with their concepts, and which state this conformity. To begin with, judgements will be declared untrue because, regardless of their correctness, they cannot state this adequacy, for the reality concerned will not admit of it.

Hence we have a categorization which is both one of judgements in the usual sense and one of levels of reality.

This will perhaps make more easily understandable the motor of the dialectic in this division. A judgement has the basic form ‘S is P’ which Hegel further specifies as linking an individual term to a universal term, hence saying ‘the (particular) is (universal)’. The motor of the dialectic is the lack of commensurability of these two terms.

For it is clearly not true that the individual is the universal. Hence there is something contradictory in the judgement, and it must be transformed. This dialectical movement, which was taken up in essentials by the British Hegelians, has been often laughed at and thought to be based on a simple mistake : the confusion of different kinds of ‘is’; between the ‘is’ of predication, the ‘is’ of existence and the ‘is’ of identity.

In order to see how the accusation of trivial confusion can arise, and also to answer it, we should start the movement of this section. We start off with the most lowly and simple kind of judgement which attributes a universal to a particular, e.g., the rose is red. We can think of this with an emphasis, as it were, on either side: either the rose as something rich containing many determinations, of which redness is one; or redness as extremely rich, instantiated countless times, of which this rose is only one example. But in either case, there is an incommensurability between the two, they are not equivalent; they are two incommensurable realities which touch only at this point, that the rose is red.

The incredulous reader is excused for believing himself the witness of a simple confusion between the ‘is’ of predication and the ‘is’ of identity. Of course, when we say the rose is red we are saying nothing about what entities the rose is identical with. The impression of confusion is increased by the emphasis Hegel puts on the copula. It carries the burden of expressing the ontological Urteil, that which underlies the very existence of external reality, hence the copula is linked at the same time to the ‘is’ of existence. So that this seems confounded in the general confusion as well. But what seems confusion here is nothing but a reflection of Hegel’s ontology. For if we are looking at judgement forms for their truth, that is, adequacy to express the basic truths of ontology, then we have to look at the terms they link from this point of view of their commensurability. At the root of everything is an idea which sunders itself into external reality, which reality nevertheless remains identical to the idea. Subjectivity must be embodied so that it both is and is not its external embodiment. Really true judgements are those which can capture this truth. But then they must be such that the terms they link are candidates for this kind of identity relation. In other words, to the extent that judgement can capture the ontological basis of things (and a single judgement cannot really do so), it must be inter alia a judgement of identity, one in which the terms it links are in an important sense identical. This we plainly do not have in judgements of quality like ‘the rose is red’. Hence they still suffer from incommensurability.

Does this mean that Hegel is assuming his ontology for the purpose of the argument in this segment, possibly because he thinks that it is already established in the earlier books of the Logic? It might sometimes sound like that, since Hegel’s discussion of subjective concept is shot through with terms which he has developed in the earlier books. One cannot be quite sure what, if anything, Hegel intended to borrow from the argument which precedes this book. But it seems unlikely that he was simply feeding the conclusion of his earlier argument into the dialectic of the Concept.

Rather what seems to underlie the motor of this dialectic is the attempt to reach a standard of really adequate thought of the object. Really adequate thought would not just relate some superficial aspect of its object, but would lay bare its essential structure. It is in virtue of this requirement that we can reproach perfectly ordinary, correct judgements of quality with being untrue because of the impossibility of relating their terms in an identity (‘Such a single quality is not congruous with the concrete nature of the subject’ EL, § 172).7

The basic property of really adequate thought for Hegel is thoroughgoing necessity. This requirement will be the real basis of incommensurability as we shall see clearer later on. Of course, this requirement, too, is bound up with Hegel’s ontology, and is unlikely to be held to by one who did not share it. But Hegel probably did not see it as a corollary to be deduced from his vision of things, so much as an inescapable requirement of thought on any theory. We shall return to this below.

Hegel starts the section of qualitative Judgement with statements like ‘the rose is red ‘which he calls positive. But the incommensurability forces us to recognize that particular is not really related to universal. Each is really for itself, identical only to itself; the particular is the particular, the universal is the universal. And this evocation of identity brings us to the next category, reflective judgements.

We cannot follow the detail of Hegel’s exposition here which takes us through a number of different forms of judgement – judgements of reflection, of necessity, of the concept. The continuing theme is the incommensurability of the two terms. Later stages of this dialectic make the connection even clearer between this notion of incommensurability and Hegel’s ontology. For instance, judgements of ‘necessity’ – such as, e.g., ‘man is an animal’ or ‘gold is a metal ‘– are necessary in that they align a species to its genus. But they are still incommensurable because they do not reflect the movement in the other diection whereby the genus determines itself to species. Gold is necessarily a metal, but there is no necessity that metal should have gold as one of its species, i.e., that gold should exist.

The basic incommensurability of the terms in Judgement could also be described as the inability of the copula ‘is’ to unite two really commensurable terms. The resolution of this contradiction comes only when we replace the simple copula with an inference; we then have no longer just ‘S is P’ but, ‘S qua X, is P’ Only a judgement of this complexity, which Hegel calls apodictic, can really show the link between S and P.

In other words, throughout Judgement the ‘is’ has not expressed the full reality of the ontological relation. It is the link between two terms, but it has not expressed the full richness and concreteness of this link. Now this comes out in the apodictic judgement, but it comes by a transformation of this link from a simple ‘is’ to a mediating specification. For instance, instead of just saying ‘the house is good’, we now say ‘the house, as built in such and such a way, is good’. But this filling out of the copula makes it into an inference. We thus transcend the sphere of Judgement and enter that of inference, or as Hegel calls it, Syllogism.

Syllogism
Syllogism unites Concept and Judgement. And it too must be seen first as ontologically grounded. As Hegel says in the note to EL, § 181 ‘Everything is a syllogism.’ Judgement is ontological because the concept always goes out into external embodiment. But we come to a truer, completer picture of reality with the ontological version of Syllogism.

The unversal is united through its sundering with the fully external existent, the full reality of the particular. Thus we really need three terms to grasp reality. There is (1) the inner unity of things, which may be taken as the universal; there is (2) the sundering, but this is always into two opposed terms, whose relation constitutes (3) a totality which is the exteriorization of the at first undifferentiated universal. Each of these terms can then be taken as our starting point, and as such is related to another through the third.

Thus in the Addition to § 187 of EL, Hegel takes as example the Idea, Nature and Spirit. The Idea is the formula of necessity underlying all reality: it must externalize itself in nature, and also come to self-knowledge in spirit. Now these three are such that each is related to one of the others through the third. Nature is what by externalizing the Idea makes possible spirit, which is internalized exteriority or nature. But nature can only rise to full manifestation of the Idea through spirit. But thirdly, the Idea is the whole which is exposed and manifested in the sundered totality of Geist and nature.

The sense in which everything qua rational is Syllogism is therefore some quite transposed sense. Syllogism Hegel takes here in the sense of that which unites two terms through a third. The real is Syllogism because it is of itself diversified, and yet the elements of this diversity are internally related, so that they unite themselves. But what is more, the division can be expressed in three terms, whereby each is connected with another through a third. The reality is a whole which can be seen first as self-identity; but which second exists as two systematically related and opposed realities; realities which each can only be through their other. Hence each of these realities is related to the whole through the other; and to the other through the whole. So that all three terms can be thought of as middle term in its turn.

The analogy of Syllogism is (1) thus the unity of each to the other through a third, (2) the fact that this can be seen as in some sense a rational, necessary, conceptual unity, and (3) the triplicity of the relationship.

But where it is dissimilar from Syllogism is in this: that the relationship is wholly symmetrical. Each one of the terms can be the middle. The nature of this unity is one which goes beyond what can be captured in a single syllogism. It can only be captured in three, and then, we would still be lacking the unity of these three formulations. In fact ontological reality shows a unity that can only be hinted at in the syllogism; as becomes clearer at the end of this section,8 but which Hegel fails to mention at the outset. It follows from this symmetry that it can appear rather arbitrary to attribute the logical terms universality, specificity, particularity to the terms of the Hegelian ontology. There is necessary triplicity, necessary conceptual unity of each to every other through the third, but the step further into the language of universality-specificity-particularity does not always fit.

Hegel in both logics is rather harsh with the ordinary sense of his age (and ours), which might accept the syllogism, as the soul of reasoning, as a subjective activity, but does not see it as an ontological property of those great objects of reasoning, (EL, § 181 note, also WL, II, 308–9) God, freedom, the infinite, etc. But everything is Syllogism because the underlying reality is ultimately such that it can only be understood as a triplicity of terms, one of which is the unity of the whole, while the other two represent the reality of this whole as sundered in two opposed, yet mutually dependent terms, which together as totality make up the whole. In fact, it is truer to say that every thing is a system of three syllogisms – or everything that is wirklich, that properly reflects the concept.9

So the truth of Syllogism is that each term is really the whole, is really the inner connection of the other two, not just externally in our reflection, but in itself.

The different forms of syllogism are laid out by Hegel with the double claim to deduce the usual table of distinctions, and to move through them as truer and truer forms to the final transition out of subjectivity. Once again, we cannot follow the detail of the development through the different forms of Syllogism. The motor of development here, the lack in each successive form that impels us on to a higher form, is the absence of necessity. A syllogism or inference claims to show a connection between two extreme terms, and if this connection is merely asserted, if the premisses are contingent, or rely on further reasoning, or worse, if they presuppose the conclusion, the inference is pro tanto imperfect.

Now what is being demanded of the syllogism here is something we do not usually ask of our inferences: not just that the conclusion follow from the premisses, but that these too be grounded in necessity. What is being, sought -and what Hegel claims to find (rather implausibly) in the ‘disjunctive’ syllogism – is a form of self-subsistent necessity, a necessity of reasoning which requires no postulate, where whatever is given at the beginning must be shown out of the system. By this criterion even judgements of the kind ‘man is a mammal ‘fail to provide adequate premisses, for – as we saw above – while it is not to be questioned that man is a mammal, we could not have this judgement unless man existed.

But to achieve a self-subsistent necessity in our thought is the same as winning through to a vision of necessity in things. To the extent that the necessary connections we are aware of are just between concepts as against in reality, to that extent we can only generate true factual conclusions if we start with a contingent postulate about reality. If we wish to use the necessary truth that the angles of a triangle = 180°, we have to be given the premiss that X is a triangle to be able to derive that X’s angles = 180°. Conversely a necessary reasoning about reality which was self-subsistent, i.e., did not need a contingent premiss, would have to be grounded on truths about reality which could not be otherwise, that is, a necessity in things. But of course, it is this vision of necessity that we are aiming at. That is why mere conceptual necessity without existential implications is no use to us.

Now of course we have already seen this ontological necessity, manifested in the development of our indispensable categories of Being and Essence. What we have been doing in this first segment of the Logic of the Concept is showing how the same vision arises out of an examination of the categories in which we describe thought. Just as the categories of reality on examination move towards a manifestation of inner necessity; so the categories of thought on examination strive towards the corresponding culmination of self-sufficient necessity.

Thus from the stage at which Concept sundered itself into Judgement, by referring to particulars in the world, we have been following the development of thought about reality. And this development was sustained by the aim of achieving self-sufficient necessity. This then has been the real basis of that incommensurability which was the motor of the dialectic. It is why the non-identity of subject and predicate in the simple judgement of quality made them incommensurable (since identity in some sense is thought by Hegel to be involved in necessary connection). This is what forced us up through the different levels of judgement, and beyond these to syllogism.

Hence this development can be seen as powered by contradiction. For if we think that the goal or standard which thought aims at is absolute necessity, then all contingent judgements and reasonings are self-defeating. This is undoubtedly how Hegel does think of it. The essence of thought is rationality, and rationality comes to full expression in necessity. Once this is accepted, the dialectic of Concept, Judgement, and Syllogism has some chance of standing up as a strict dialectic.

But the question is whether one can accept this standard as the defining one for thought. And on the strength of what should one accept it? In the case of the Logic it could be justified as flowing out of the earlier books. This may have been Hegel’s justification. But I do not think this question was all that clearly answered in Hegel’s mind; and I believe that he at least half thought that rational self-sufficient necessity was one of the criterial properties of thought. And in this case, of course, the dialectic of subjective concept would be a self-authenticating one quite independent of what precedes it in the Logic. Hegel would be encouraged in this belief by the reflection that our thought is not easily satisfied with purely contingent correlations, that it looks everywhere for a reason.

But whatever the grounding of its principle, the dialectic of this segment moves towards a culmination in rationally necessary thought. And since this culmination is inseparable from a vision of rational necessity in things, this is the point at which we can say that subjectivity goes over into objectivity.

‘Subjectivity’ has two applications in Hegel. The absolute is subject, and one which posits its own embodiment. In this sense reality is ultimately subjectivity and this is an ultimate category. It is in this sense that the whole third book of the Logic is also called ‘Subjective Logic’. But the word can also be used in something like its ordinary sense, in which we contrast what is ‘merely’ subjective with the reality over against it. This is the sense that the term has in this first segment of the third book, whose title is ‘Subjectivity’.

This second sense in which what is subjective is less than, is inadequate to the real, has a perfectly legitimate use. Throughout this first segment we have been looking at modes of thought which are subjective in this inadequate sense. Corresponding to this imperfect thought is, as we have also seen, imperfect reality, which also fails to exhibit thoroughgoing necessity. But when thought rises to perfect necessity, and hence to a vision of the ontological foundation of things, it ceases to be one-sidedly opposed to reality. It becomes one with cosmic subjectivity which is so far from being devoid of and less than the real, that it actually produces the world out of itself.

Subjective thought goes over at its perfection into objectivity not only in that it ceases to be distinct from reality because inadequate to it; but also in the stronger sense that it rejoins absolute subjectivity which ‘goes over’ in the sense of positing reality.

This sounds awfully reminiscent of the ontological argument. And Hegel is the first to recognize and welcome this rapprochement, which he raises in the text. For of course, the ontological argument is really founded, if we give it the right form. We have here the right form. The absolute, as Concept – not just in someone’s mind, here Anselm is still inadequate – must go over into existence. For the Concept, properly understood, is a self-subsistent conceptual necessity and this requires instantiation in reality. And to understand the Concept is to understand that it can only be this kind of conceptual necessity. But of course this only applies to the Concept, the absolute, the concept of the whole, or the idea of God in traditional language. This necessity of existence does not cancel contingency as we have seen, and hence whole lots of things are quite contingent and their existence is not contained in their concept, like the hundred dollars in my wallet, which is of course without necessary connection with the hundred dollars in my mind.

And even for things whose existence is necessary, features of the universe, like man: their necessity only flows from the whole, not just from their concept, if we think of this as the particular concept in the whole system which designates them. We can prove the necessity of finite spirit (men), but this follows from the whole system, not just from the concept of man taken on its own, as, e.g. rational life. Hence the Kantian objection weighs for such particular elements, and particularly for those which are contingent. It weighs for particular elements in so far as they are taken in abstraction, and for the contingent, for it is what takes itself as an abstraction, that wherein the concept is separate from the existence. But the objection totally misses the point applied to the ontological argument, the proof of the whole.

On the other side Hegel cannot just accept the formulations of Anselm, Descartes, Leibniz et al. For one thing they would be horrified to see the kind of ‘God’ whose existence is here proved, for this existence is inseparable from that of the world as ordered whole, and this is not the God worshipped by Christians. But Hegel specifically points out that the whole probative centre of the argument is left out and the conclusion just given in the Anselmian premiss that existence must belong to the most perfect. Or if it is argued for it is on the grounds that existence is in general a perfection, which invites the Kantian riposte. What is needed is to give the concept of the infinite whereby it must necessarily exist in a way which does not apply to the finite. This is connected with the other failing of the traditional proof which is to start with a concept in our minds. The proof really follows the unfolding of existence out of the ontological concept. Hence in the ratio cognoscendi it presupposes the other proofs for the existence of God, while it is really primary in the ratio essendi.

This last reflection enables us to see even more clearly how Hegel is at cross purposes with formal logic as this is usually understood. The ‘forms’ of thought are classified in terms of their functions in reasoning by both types of study. But for Hegel reasoning reaches its culmination in self-sufficient necessity, which is the same as the vision of a necessity in things. Hence the basic démarche of formal logic is not to abstract from content. On the contrary, it is the distinguishing mark of imperfect forms that form and content are not united, that they are ‘just formal’. As we ascend the scale to more and more adequate forms, we move away from what ordinary formal logic would accept as formal criteria of distinction. We are no longer dealing with propositional functions which could take just anything as their arguments. Rather the search for an adequate ‘form’ in Hegel’s sense (rational necessity) requires that we put restrictions on the concepts which can serve in it. Thus the judgement of reflection, or the syllogism of necessity are partly defined by their objects. And the final perfectly adequate form is only instantiated in Hegel’s ontological vision itself.

Thus the ‘formal’ part of his logic and the usual science of formal logic are on utterly different tracks. But this is not to say that they can peacefully coexist as two quite independent enterprises. There is a philosophical issue involved. First, Hegel’s enterprise is only given viability, even sense, by his ontological vision. It is because form is already immanent in content (necessity is in things), that it makes sense to try to draw content out of form (develop by formal criteria a thought adequate to reality). And reciprocally, Hegel while not denying the validity of ordinary formal logic cannot but depreciate its importance. It is not the science of reasoning at its highest. Hegel in fact would have been delighted with the modern developments in which logic has been shown to be continuous with mathematical thinking, since he always classed mathematics as the most external form of thought, incapable of really grasping the conceptual structure of things.

Thus in the dialectic of the subjective Concept we have come to the same conclusion as arose out of the dialectic of Being and Essence, the vision of a totality of the real which is manifestation of rational necessity. We had to prove this out of subjective thought also. Because if we were right that reality comes to exhibit conceptual necessity, then our conceptual thought should point towards a completion in unconditionally necessary reasoning. This has now been done and we return to a self-subsistent totality, an immediate reality

which has emerged through the cancellation [Aufhebung] of mediation, a being which is also identical with mediation, and [which] is the Concept which has constructed itself out of and in its otherness. This Being is therefore a reality [Sache] which is an und für sich – Objectivity.

(WL, II, 352)

II: OBJECTIVITY
The Concept thus goes over into objectivity. The search for self-subsistent necessity only reaches its end in a vision of reality as a necessary totality. We have thus in a sense returned to the vision of things which we had at the end of Substance. But we are now in a position to draw a much richer and fuller portrait of it.

What we learnt through Being and Essence was that reality constituted a totality governed by necessity and which manifested this necessity. But we learnt very little about the concrete articulation of this totality. We know only, through the dialectics of inner and outer, and necessity and contingency, that the whole must display contingency on its surface, as it were, since this is inseparable from exteriority.

What we did glean from this, however, was that reality as absolute or unconditioned necessity is structured by concepts. This led us to examine subjective conceptual thought, and we found that it, too, was driven by an inner standard to what is now self-consciously a vision of a self-sufficient necessary totality. But now that we know that subjective thought reaches the same culmination as reality, that the concept in the mind is fundamentally one with the ontological concept, we are able to draw on what we have learned about the articulations of subjective concept to derive some of the necessary articulation of the real.

This is what Hegel now proceeds to do. What previously we knew only as totality governed by necessity is now seen as a structure with levels. Reality necessarily manifests different levels of being. The dialectic of Objectivity derives these in ascending order.

The stages by which we pass are called by Hegel ‘Mechanism,’ ‘Chemism’, ‘Teleology’. But we must not assume from these titles that we will be concerned with an examination of mechanical and chemical theories. These are treated in the philosophy of nature. Rather we are dealing with certain very general ways of conceiving objectivity which have application respectively in the mechanical and chemical spheres, but also outside. Thus the mechanical also applies to certain functions of the mind, as when we learn by rote; and the ‘chemical’ in this sense is visible in the attraction between the sexes.10

The whole movement of this division is from externality of connection to the kind of intrinsic necessity which we have with life. For this section will end with Internal Teleology which is the category by which we understand life, and the next part opens with life. But Hegel wants to take in on the way different ways of conceiving objectivity which also have their obvious place and which were present in the sciences of his day. Some of these ways seem a little odd to us because they belong to the science of his day, or one school of speculation within it, but not in ours.

The motor of this development is the ‘absolute contradiction’ (EL, § 194) which consists in the fact that the real is at once a totality, whose parts are thus inwardly related, and yet also made up of parts which are integral and independent (selbständig and vollständig). For as well as having mediation and relatedness, it also has objectivity, immediacy, externality. In order to satisfy fully both these opposed descriptions reality has to articulate itself into different levels.

We start off with things as purely external and independent. Each thing is external and indifferent to the others. But this means that it is a mere aggregate in itself, for there is no reason to draw the boundaries of a thing or object at any given level. Hence each object is itself an aggregate of objects without intrinsic connection.

Mechanism
This is the level of mechanism. On this level of immediacy and externality, the thing is indifferent to its own characteristics, or put another way, its characteristics hang together in it without any internal necessity. It is because of this that we have to explain these characteristics by something else; the relations of causation which explain what it is are external, foreign to it (WL, II, 360). Hence mechanism recognizes only efficient causation, which is always causation between terms which are merely contingentiy linked and identified, as Hume showed. Even causation ‘within’ an object turns out on examination to be a causal relation between separable parts of this object.

This yields the vision of determinism, in which the characteristics of one object are explained by another, and this in turn by another, and so on to the bad infinite.

But this level of purely external, contingent relations cannot be the whole story. For we know that things are also internally related, by necessity. Hence this level cannot subsist alone but requires others at which the relation is progressively interiorized. The object must become more of a centre. It must develop greater internal coherence, and demand according to its nature to be related in a certain way to others.

In the course of this interiorization Hegel takes us through a number of stages, each of which correspond to an obvious aspect of reality according to the science which he took as valid. Thus we move from the object which is purely indifferent to its characteristics, which thus offer no resistance whatever to the communication of such imponderable properties as movement, heat, magnetism, electric charge,11 to the object as having a certain definite character and hence offering resistance to influences from outside, which thus appear as external force.12 And from here we move to a further interiorization where an object is intrinsically related to others, as in a solar system for instance, which is not just a bunch of indifferent objects, but of objects which are ordered in definite roles vis-à-vis each other; sun, planets, satellites.13

But the intrinsic relation to others is still not in the very stuff of the object at this stage: true the earth is held in orbit by the sun, but this is dependent on its being in this spot, its very matter is not of itself and alone related to this centre. So that if we hauled it into outer space it would no longer be so related. Hence we step to the stage of Chemism where we see different substances as intrinsically related to each other,’ tensed ‘towards each other with the nisus to combine, to overcome their one-sidedness and become a single neutral substance. The dialectic of Chemism which is the middle chapter of this second division is pretty heavily indebted to chemical speculations of the time as they were taken up in contemporary philosophies of nature. Hence this chapter is both hard to follow, and unconvincing. It ends with a transition to Teleology.

Teleology
We come here to the highest level of reality which the world must exhibit. For in teleology we have the fullest embodiment of internal necessity. We are thinking, of course, of the notion of internal teleology, derived from Aristotle.14 For this is the notion of a sense or purpose which is inherent in the object itself. The purpose is its essence, its most profound characterization. Internal Teleology is thus the category we need to characterize the system of absolute necessity, which we have had before us since the end of Essence.

Although Life is the category which comes after, and out of Teleology, living things – conceived outside of a possible reduction to mechanism – provide the best example of Hegel’s category here. For living things have a form which is inherent in them. That is, the form is not imposed by the hazard of outside efficient causes, but is one which they realize themselves as they grow. This form is inseparable from their matter, it is the form inherent in a physical organism.

Their form is also a necessity, as it were, in that they cannot help trying to conform to it. But at the same time it is their own necessity. It is what defines them and is not something foreign. To conform to it is freedom for them.

The requirements of the whole life form can explain partial acts or processes in the organism, as what is needed for the whole. But this explanation does not just account for a fact by relating it to another, as with accounts in terms of efficient cause. It relates this fact to a purpose; it gives the reason for it. It gives the sense behind things.

Teleological explanation is explanation out of totality. The partial processes are explained by their role in the whole. And in this way, also, explicandum and explicans are not really distinct, since the process explained is part of what explains it.

Teleology is thus the category in which we can account for the kind of totality Hegel envisages. For it is made up of independent, external realities, whose deployment nevertheless follows a necessity, but which necessity is not imposed from outside but inheres in the external reality itself. This necessity is, as it were, the life form of the whole. Internal teleology is thus the highest form of inner connectedness which external reality can exhibit. It is therefore the culminating term of this development which started with the pure external indifference of mechanism. The gamut of levels of being which the universe must contain runs from this formal mechanism to teleology.

The necessary instantiation of this highest level is what lies behind the fact that there are living beings in the world. But this category is also instantiated by the whole itself. Only, of course, the whole or absolute, unlike any living being, does not have a life-form which is just given, but rather one which it develops fully out of itself, as Reason. Its life’s blood is reason, and the heart which pumps it is contradiction.

But in talking about life, we are running ahead of Hegel, who takes up this category at the beginning of the next and last segment of Concept. And Hegel, moreover does not step right from Chemism into the proper conception of teleology. Rather he makes one more transition, in which he starts from the conception which is current for common sense and philosophies of the understanding.

Now Hegel believes as always that the basic principles of his ontology have been there in a confused form in people’s minds for a long time. And one of the confused views, which puts together both the sense that teleology is an important category with which to understand the whole, and the common sense view shared by the philosophy of the understanding that form and content must be separate, is the view of the world as the product of an external teleology, that of God.

This inadequate notion is External Teleology – which of course is also instantiated as a subordinate level of reality. This is a category in which we look at things as the fulfilment of ends which are external to them. External teleology has its place, for instance in the artefacts and doings of man. We build houses to live in, grow food to eat, and so on. The ‘teleology’ of a house, a car, a field of corn (their Zweckmässigkeit) is outside of them; it must be referred to another agent.

Hegel inveighs against this notion of providence, particularly the variants current in a certain facile, optimistic Deism of the eighteenth century, and prefers to take the side of mechanism against it. In actual fact, he explains, it leads to the attribution of all sorts of quite ridiculous particular purposes to God in the attempt to account for the detail of the world. It ends up with a whole set or bundle of unconnected ends ascribed to the deity; whereas the demands of reason are for a connected whole. At least mechanism tries to give us this (WL, II, 385–6). Moreover, it does not really lead to a fully necessary explanation by reasons, because God’s reasons remain unknown. Hence contingency has the last word. In this, mechanism is no better; but it makes no claim to real explanation by reason. Hence External Teleology is worse because it lets down the side as it were, occupying the place of reason without being able to deliver the goods and do better, or even as well, as mechanism. ‘External teleology is the stage immediately before the Idea, but what thus stands on the threshold is often precisely the least adequate’ (EL, § 205, Addition).

Hegel wants thus to transcend External Teleology to Internal. External Teleology still maintains the separation of content and form (EL, § 205). The whole interest of Internal Teleology was that it really united the necessity with that which it operates in, that the form was inherent in the matter, as we saw with the analysis of the living thing. But this feature which gives it a place in Hegel’s explication of the absolute is lost in External Teleology. On this view, I stand over against an external world. I have at first a purely subjective goal, and I put it into effect. So External Teleology presupposes at the start a separation between matter and the form which is to be fulfilled. And this separation is not really overcome, since the form is just something I impose on a pre-existing matter, it does not come from that matter itself. Thus let us say I build a house. The materials which go to make up the house are formed by me, but this form remains external to these materials; it is not a self-formation on their part, as the growth of a living organism is. My interaction with these materials is purely external, it belongs to the domain of mechanism and chemism; they are formed from outside, and remain ‘indifferent ‘to this form.

This is not only true of our external teleology, that of our finite goals, but also of the teleological explanation of things by God’s intentions. For the objects which God makes to serve a certain purpose remain in this sense ‘indifferent’ to this purpose. It does not come from them. This is why the purpose remains hidden unless we come to understand the being who made them. And since on this view we cannot understand God, the purpose remains forever hidden; something Hegel cannot accept.

In our particular purposes, the end is finite in another sense as well. It is a particular end, not the end of the whole; and therefore not something that justifies itself. It is a purpose which I impose on things, but not one which springs from them themselves. It is arbitrary. It is this, I think, which Hegel is saying where he claims that the product of a finite goal is itself a means, and that this is the root of an endless regress. (WL, II, 397). As long as we are dealing with externally imposed goals, with goals which presuppose an independent object to be worked on, what is end and what is means is something arbitrary and subjective, depending on the agent who is acting. We grow grain in order to make bread, and eat bread to live; and live to? Living is the end, perhaps; but then is eating just a means to it, or is it part of it? Or to put the point another way, whatever we decide is the end can itself be questioned in its turn. Why seek this? We do not come to a final end which springs from the very nature of things, as with internal teleology.

But alongside, or underlying the external teleology of everyday life is an internal teleology of the whole; one which englobes our activity, which we understand in terms of finite ends. This transition is of course, powered by the need to grasp in objectivity an inherent necessity, which we can ultimately only find in internal teleology. Hegel makes the transition through the use of the concept of means.

Finite agents use means to accomplish their finite ends. That is, they take up a bit of the external world, and turn it on other bits to fulfil their purpose. They use tools, for instance. In this way, some part of the world becomes incorporated into their activity, it becomes swept up in action (Tätigkeit). The fulfilment of a finite end is like a syllogism in which the agent is related to the object through the means.

Now the relation of agent to means is at first just external and mechanical; but it eventually must point to a more inner relationship. Part of what Hegel seems to be hinting at is this: there is a certain incoherence in the idea of means as external to the agent if we want to push it to the very end and class everything as means which serves the end. For in order to use mechanical means in the world the agent must himself be a body. But we cannot understand this body just as a tool, and all that it does as simply means, for then there is nothing left of the agent. For instance there are certain primitive actions which cannot be further broken down, cannot be understood as performed by the performance of other actions. These can be seen as means, but not as means separate from the agent. He is not manipulating these actions; his manipulation of things just is these actions. This and related points have been explored in contemporary philosophy. Moving outward we can see that some of these primitive actions include our skilled manipulation of certain tools; so that in this sense our interaction with the means-object we are employing cannot be thought of as just mechanical.

Thus the first ‘premiss’ of our syllogism can be seen as mediated. But the second seems still quite external. When I work with an axe on a tree, the relation between me and the axe has to be understood in terms of skilled performance; the axe is integrated into my skilled performance. But the relationship between axe and tree is fully mechanical. But, says Hegel, these mechanical processes ‘return of themselves, as has been shown to the goal’ (WL, II, 397). In other words the whole movement of this chapter, rather than any examination of the particular phenomenon of subjective end-activity, requires that we go to a higher standpoint. We may see some unity between agent and means by examining external purposive production. But what is needed is a change of standpoint altogether, whereby we see the whole as purposive.

The switch of perspective to the whole brings us back to Internal Teleology. We must now see the activity of man, and the course of the world, which is the backdrop to it and which it affects, as one great course of life; as forming itself. But in this vision, all the oppositions fall away. What is worked on is no longer separate from the agent. The forming agent is internal to the formed.

Hence in Inner Teleology all the terms which are held apart in Outer Teleology come together. In the organism, to take this example again, everything is means to its life, but its good functioning, of liver, heart, etc., is also the end, for this is part of the organism. The organism again, in its adult healthy state is the realized end, but this does not prevent it from being always in the process of realization. Hence it is as it were, a standing intention, or nisus towards its own realization Hence nisus, means, realized end all come together. But all these aspects are not just collapsed. They remain as real aspects of the object. In order to understand it we have to see it as realized and realizing, see the end-means relations in it.

In this ascending dialectic, therefore, mechanism, and the pursuance of finite ends by finite spirits, point towards a fuller, all-embracing teleology of the course of the world; one which is always both realized and being realized, which is always at the end and the beginning; in which everything is means and yet part of the end. But mechanical relations and finite purposive activity are not cancelled or annulled. They remain real; only their action is in some way taken up and is grist to the mill of the infinite purpose.

The underlying conception here is one of different levels of being, the necessary articulations of a universe which must exhibit both independent externality and inner connectedness. Because there are different levels of being, there are also different levels of explanation. Mechanism can thus provide adequate explanations on its level (and the different stages of mechanism each on its own sub-level), while the phenomena it explains are incorporated in more complex beings which must be accounted for in higher categories, and ultimately in a whole which can only be understood teleologically.

We saw in Essence how the necessity of the structure of things went along with, indeed required contingency on their surface. Now the relationship between the two is fleshed out in the vision of a universe which exhibits different levels of being. The necessary structure of things manifests itself in a vision of the universe as the unfolding of an inner purpose. But the unfolding of this purpose requires its embodiment in external, material reality, and this is subject to mechanical and chemical forces and laws. The interstitial or superficial contingency of things, which always remains within the bounds of rational structure and plays its part in the perpetual realization of this structure, can be studied and mapped by laws of these lower levels, of Mechanism and Chemism.

Hegel is nowhere very clear about the way these different levels relate to each other. But he invokes here, as elsewhere, his famous image of the ‘cunning of Reason’, by which the higher purpose makes use of lower level principles in encompassing its end. Rather than working directiy on the object, the higher purpose slips another object between itself and what it wants to transform. If it were to enter direcdy into the interaction of things, it would be a particular thing itself and would go under like all such things. But it cunningly saves itself from this fate by having its work done for it by the mechanical interaction of things in the world. (WL, II, 398.)

This image may not be totally clarifying. But it reiterates the Hegelian idea that the infinite life of the world goes on through and beyond the demise of finite things. It only lives in these finite things, and hence through them, but it perpetually survives their necessary end. More, the play of contingency itself serves to realize the necessary plan of things. This is the full meaning of Hegel’s image. If we ask how things work out this way, the answer is that contingency itself is part of the necessary plan. Within the play of contingency I may die today or forty years from now. But in either case my demise, as my life, expresses the necessary structure of things by which Geist must be embodied in finite spirits which as finite contradict his infinity and hence must die. I die in the end because of some footling mechanical failure: e.g., my heart fails as a pump. But then it is in the nature of the finite subject as a materially embodied being to be subject to the play of mechanical forces, and hence exposed to such failures. If it had not been this one it would have been another.

But Hegel’s image of the cunning of Reason is also, and especially, related to history (cf. reference in EL, § 209, Addition). In this sense God’s providence is the absolute cunning because he lets men follow their own passions and interests, but what happens is nevertheless the fulfilment of his intentions. We may find this relation harder to understand and credit than that between Mechanism and Inner Teleology. We will return to it in the next part.

Thus the universe has many levels because it is the unfolding of an inner necessity in external reality. The infinite end is realized through finite ends. And that is why we can see the end of Reason both as always realized and as always having to be realized.15 The experience of finite subjects is that the plan of Reason has yet to be fulfilled. They strive towards it. But if we rise to a vision of the whole we can see that this very striving is part of the plan and that as a whole it is already realized (EL, § 212, Addition). The appearance of unrealizedness is an error, a deception; and yet this deception itself is brought about by the Idea, as is the overcoming of this error by ourselves.

Thus the necessity which we followed through the book of Essence emerges here as purpose. The necessity inherent in reality is an unconditioned one, as we saw. This means that the course of things is not determined by merely given antecedents, it does not exhibit the ineluctable consequences of certain given premisses. On the contrary, nothing is merely given in the system of unconditioned necessity. Everything which happens issues from necessity. Hence what follows from the conception of the universe as the locus of unconditioned necessity is a vision of things in which purpose is paramount.

We can speak of a purpose when for some reason a goal can be thought of as at work in events prior to its fulfilment, bringing these events about, so that they occur, as we say, ‘for the sake of’ this goal. But this means that the notion of purpose was already implicit in the idea that changes in the world come about of conceptual necessity. Thus when we explain the changes in finite things, as we already did in Infinity, as powered by contradiction, we are saying that the cycle of changes in the world comes about in a perpetual attempt to resolve contradiction. Or in other words, we explain these changes by a norm they are striving to meet.

But the conception of the purposiveness of things is taken to a higher power when we come to see the necessity as absolute. To see events as directed towards a norm or end is to see them as offering an answer to the question, why do they happen? But normally we think of the search for reasons as coming to an end somewhere, at a goal which just has to be taken as given. When we have described the life form of a finite living thing, in terms of which we explain aspects of its structure and activity, there is no further answer to the question, why? The life form just is as it is.

But absolute necessity does not repose on some given premiss which would be beyond explanation. Necessity is absolute because everything can be derived from Reason. Hence the question, why? never reaches a barrier in the merely given. Or if one prefers this formulation, the ultimate goal is just that Geist or Reason be, i.e., that there be a rational structure all aspects of which yield an answer to the question, why? in which nothing is given as a merely ‘positive’ fact. In this world purpose is supreme or absolute, purposive explanation is ultimate in a radical sense.

Hence the universe is to be seen as the unfolding of a purpose. Moreover the purpose must be internal. For an unconditional necessity, as we saw at the end of Subjectivity, must be in things. If we were dealing with external teleology, a purpose imposed by a transcendent God, then the necessity would not be absolute. The shape of things would repose ultimately on divine fiat.

The whole must thus be seen in the category of Internal Teleology. The all embracing purpose inheres in the universe itself. This is what underlay the Substance, Cause, Interaction of the later phases of Essence. For to explain by the inner purpose of the whole is what we called there explanation out of the totality. The universe which unfolds according to its own purpose is causa sui. The purpose is a cause but no longer an external one. Purpose remains in its result (‘it is not transient in its agency but maintains itself’, EL, § 204).

Hence at the end of Objectivity we come to a view of the universe as unfolding in fulfilment of an intrinsic purpose. But we are not just dealing with a living thing. We know that this objectivity has been posited by the Concept, by thought seeking necessity, seeking the fully rational. So it passes to a new ontological category, that of a reality which only exists to fulfil a formula of Reason; whose only existence is to fulfil an Idea. This is a unity of the objective and the subjective. But it is not a simple identity. Rather they must also be in a sense distinct since one posits the other and determines it to be what it is. They are one, but also in relation. As in a subject, their unity is not only an sich but also für sich (EL, § 212). Objectivity not only fulfils the ideal formula of thought; but is made to do so by this formula. Hence the two are joined and yet forever over against each other (as the purpose in inner teleology is always fulfilled and being fulfilled). For this relation, the term which irresistibly springs to mind is Plato’s Idea. Kant first borrowed the term. Now Hegel follows suit.

### III: THE IDEA
So we begin the Idea, Idea is to be understood in the Platonic sense. It is the inner reason which makes the external reality what it is. Hence it is to be understood in connection with the Hegelian idea of truth, the unity of concept and objectivity. ‘The Idea is the true which is an und für sich’ (EL, § 213). For truth as we saw is that reality be in agreement with its concept, with the concept which produces it. But the concept producing a reality and bringing it into agreement with it, this is the Idea.

Kant was right thus to think of the Idea as something unconditional, transcendent, of which we could make no adequate empirical application (WL, II, 407). But as usual, he drew the diametrically wrong conclusion. Instead of concluding that the Idea has no ontological status but is just regulative of our thought, he should have seen that this inadequacy of the empirical reality is not a lack in the Idea but in empirical things. This is why they are finite. ‘The individual on its own does not correspond to its concept; it is this limitation of its existence which constitutes its finitude and its demise’ (EL, § 213).

Nevertheless, however imperfect, the particular thing only exists at all because it to some extent expresses the Idea. Even bad states, men, etc. that is, untrue states, men, etc. only exist because they are not entirely so. For everything that exists comes out of the Idea. The totally untrue, a reality which would in no way correspond to the Idea, would be nothing (WL, II, 309).

In this third part, we are going to bring this conclusion of the whole Logic to its full development. We started off in the category of Infinity, which was our first category which presented the whole as totality, with the idea of a self-subsistent system of necessary changes. Through Essence we developed this further and saw that this necessity was inherent in external reality itself; but that this reality as external also exhibited contingency. But this contingency was not independent, rather it was posited by necessity. The necessity in things was thus absolute, that is, not conditional on anything merely given.

Absolute necessity brought us to the Concept. With what we gained from this we returned to examine the totality of the real and developed its articulations much further. So that we now see it as distributed on a hierarchy of levels of reality, of which the lower, starting with the mechanical, are incorporated in greater, more intensive unities by the higher. The highest level is that of purpose, and it is instantiated by the whole. So that we not only see the whole as governed by necessity, but as exhibiting purpose.

It is this ultimacy of purpose which has been drawn out explicidy in Objectivity. And this is what has led us to the higher category of the Idea. For if absolute necessity means that purposive explanation is ultimate, then we must see the whole world as there for a purpose, as there in order to manifest this necessity. So that we are no longer envisaging it as a whole which is given, and which as a matter of fact is governed by necessity, as we have an animal species which is given and which as a matter of fact is shaped by a given life-form. This whole which manifests necessity exists for a purpose, so that we can say that it exists in order to manifest necessity. The formula of this conceptual necessity is the Idea, hence the world exists to realize the Idea.

Now we can see the whole as the locus of a double movement. There is the movement of finite things which go under and succeed each other in an effort to overcome the inconsistency of finitude, to attain the self-coherence of rationality. But there is also the movement of the Idea of rationality itself, which goes out and posits a world of finite things. The duality of worlds, or the duality in the real which we constantly had in Essence could never sustain itself, for reality is one. But the duality of movements which we have now arrived at is consistent with the unity of the real, for these movements form a circle. We have not added something but enriched our understanding of the one self-sufficient totality.

But if the Idea itself goes out and posits a world, which is external and thus only imperfectly exhibits its inner connections, then it too contains difference and division within it. For it must posit its opposite, what negates it, in order to be. Hence corresponding to the contradiction in the finite and grounding it is as it were a contradiction in the infinite, which lies in the fact that the infinite only achieves its identity by reconciling contradiction, by finding itself in its other. This central position of contradiction follows once we accept absolute necessity. For if the world of contradictory, finite, things exists of necessity, if that which being external and indifferent cannot fully embody the formula of necessity exists according to that formula, then this Idea itself contains its own opposition.

The Idea is thus a process of positing its other and then recovering its unity with itself in its other (EL, § 215, WL, II, 412). This process is a dialectical one. It is a struggle, and any conception of the Idea which omits this is radically faulty.

the thought which frees reality [Wirklichkeit] from the show of purposeless mutability and transfigures it into the Idea must not represent this truth of reality as dead repose or a mere picture, lifeless, without impulse or movement...; the Idea, by virtue of the freedom which the Concept attains in it, has also the most stubborn opposition within itself; its repose consists in the security and certainty with which it eternally creates and eternally overcomes this opposition, and comes together with itself in it [in ihm mit sich selbst zusammengeht].

(WL, II, 412)

The whole system hangs together by contradiction and struggle. The Idea puts forward reality in order to be. But were this reality not contradictory, and hence transient and in movement, it would not show forth necessity, and hence the Idea would not be. So the Idea has to put forth a world which is in contradiction to itself, as well as being its own other.

This process can only be grasped by reason, the thought which thinks the oppositions in their movement, whereby they come to be and are overcome. Understanding which tries to fix the opposition is impotent here and is doomed to distort reality. (EL, § 214.)

It follows from this that the final category, the Idea, is not just the result of the previous stage of the Logic. It in a sense includes them all. For the Idea issues in the particular realities which are captured by the other categories. And at the same time it links them all together so that they come back to itself. It thus englobes all that has gone before.

The absolute is the universal and one Idea, which sunders itself in the act of judgement into the system of determinate ideas; which in turn by their very nature return to the one Idea which is their truth.

(EL, § 213)

This division will articulate what it is to see reality as posited by the Idea, by a purpose. First, of course, it is to see the whole as analogous to a great process of life, as we saw in the last division. The first category taken up will therefore be Life.

But if we think of the whole as emanating from conceptual necessity, then this necessity has to be for a subject. Hegel now adds a crucial dimension to the picture of reality he is drawing. Of course, the existence of the subject has been implicit all along for we have been dealing with categorial concepts, concepts with which the subject thinks his world. But this was just part of our given starting point. Now Hegel shows it to be a necessary feature of the universe that the world appear to a subject.

The underlying reasoning seems to be this: conceptual necessity means a necessity of thought and this presupposes a thinker. To say that the world is posited by conceptual necessity is to say that thought is at its foundation. And thought necessarily appears to itself. So that a universe posited by conceptual necessity must be aware of itself. But this awareness could not remain merely implicit and semi-conscious, for the thought at the basis of everything is conceptual necessity, and this can only be exhibited in the explicit clarity of conceptual thinking. True necessity can only be properly aware of itself in concepts. So that if the process of thought at the base of things were to remain merely implicit, it would paradoxically remain outside the system of thoroughgoing necessity which it posits. It would violate its own essential requirement.

Hence if necessity is to be all-embracing, if it is not to leave something outside it as merely given, it must appear to itself. Hegel sees these two requirements, for the omnicompetence of the Idea and for its self-consciousness, as inseparably linked. The link was already present in the notion of reality as Appearance, of necessity as manifest, which we saw in Essence. For the claim was first that necessity as manifest is really in things, not imposed from some other, hidden source, and hence that it is total, i.e., it does not presuppose a reality on which it works and whose original existence is outside its scope. But Hegel was also claiming in the same breath, as it were, that a necessity which is intrinsic to manifest, external reality must itself be made manifest, that is, it must appear to a subject. A necessity which could not be made manifest, one which was hidden and unknowable, and in that sense merely inner, would also be ‘outer’ that is, it would not fully bind reality. Thus conceptual necessity to be absolute, to penetrate reality without remainder, must become manifest in thought.

That is why the winning of clarity in philosophy is itself part of the realization of the Idea in the world. And that is why this third book of the Logic has explicitly envisaged reality as for a subject.

Thus the unity of Idea and reality cannot be simply an sich, as it is in Life, it must also be für sich. So that Knowledge is a fundamental category of the Logic. We must accept that ‘absolute truth is the object of the logic and truth as such is essentially knowing’, (WL, II, 413–14).

But then knowledge requires consciousness, the structure in which a subject is over against an object. In other words, there must be finite subjects, both because as consciousness they must be over against a world of objects and because as really existing subjects they must be determinate. And this introduces another division in the world, or rather shows us the basic division of Idea and reality from another angle. The Idea must go out into its other, external reality, in order to return to itself. But its return is just the making manifest of this necessity in reality. Hence the return is complete when this necessity is fully grasped by the subject. But subjectivity is necessarily finite, and hence the struggle to return can be seen as the struggle to overcome this finitude and come to a grasp of the infinite, the whole, the absolute.

Beyond Life, therefore, the Idea must generate the category of Knowledge. But knowledge, too, as the consciousness of finite subjects must be transcended. Since this is a struggle of finite subject to transcend himself, it concerns not only knowing but also willing. And the transcending of finite knowledge brings us to an infinite knowledge, that knowledge of the whole by the whole, which is the Absolute Idea.

This then will be the plan of this last segment. It will take us from Life, to Knowledge, which in turn will be divided into a discussion of knowing and willing, to the Absolute Idea.

We start with Life, both because it is the immediate unity of Idea and reality, and also because knowledge presupposes life. For the kind of unity between Idea and reality which knowledge is presupposes an immediate unity, one in which reality is actually in conformity with the Idea. Consciousness, as we saw, can only arise in living beings. So this immediate unity is derived in the Logic both for itself, out of the category of Teleology, and as a presupposition of Knowledge which is the necessary following category (WL, II, 414).

Life
Hegel understands life very much as Aristotle did. The living being is the locus of inner teleology; he is both means and end. He cannot be understood as just composed of parts, but of members, that is his parts are essentially related to each other in their role in the whole life-process. Each is both means and end. Thus Hegel quotes Aristotle with approval, that a hand which is separated from the body is still a hand in name only (EL, 216, Addition). Life realizes the immediate truth of the Idea because it illustrates the unity whereby the purpose or form is intrinsic to the content, the matter itself. A living being is an objective totality, intrinsically bound together in a single process of life which is always realized and always being realized. Life thus transcends mechanism and chemism which are held in subordination as long as life continues. They start to take over as soon as death occurs; ‘the elemental forces of objectivity ...are as it were continually ready to pounce [auf dem Sprunge], to set their process going in the organic body, and life is a standing fight against them’ (EL, § 219, Addition).

But the objective does have its day, for death is essential to the living. Here Hegel states again one of his basic theses (EL, § 216). As unity of the Idea and objectivity, Life must be embodied, hence must be embodied somewhere, hence must be particular living thing. But as particular living thing it can never really conform to the universal idea, it is contradictory and so mortal. It must go under.

But as particular living thing, it is over against inorganic nature (EL, § 219). This is the ‘Urteil’ of the concept; that is, the concept of life necessarily sunders itself into living thing and world which stands over against it. He has to maintain his life over against this reality. Hence life is a standing activity, a struggle (beständiger Kampf) against its opposite. Life is a process which must always be creating itself out of its opposite. For life is particular living things. These are distinguished and hence opposed to the outside world. They have to maintain themselves by assimilating this outside world. This is the dialectical derivation of the assimilative interchange of animals with the environment.

This struggle is a reflection of the struggle that is inherent to the Idea which must realize itself against its own external self. This struggle is a contradiction and so is it in the animal world. The animal needs something; it knows that this something outside it should be part of it and is not. It feels this in impulse, or sometimes pain. Pain is thus the ‘privilege’ of living things, it belongs to them only as the existing concept (WL, II, 424). This is the living contradiction, which is the answer to all those who claim that contradiction is unthinkable (loc. cit.).

The contradiction is resolved by the animal incorporating what it needs. This it can do because external reality is already an sich the idea. It thus becomes incorporated to the organic. The organic can work on the inorganic mechanically, but not vice versa. The inorganic can only stimulate (erregen) the living. (WL, II, 425.)

Thus the living individual comes to produce himself, to cancel the ‘presupposition’ of an inorganic opposite him and incorporate it in himself. In doing this he becomes substantial universal, what Hegel calls ‘Gattung’ (genus). This means that he undergoes another kind of sundering, now into two individuals. This is the dialectical derivation of sexual differentiation. The living thing is an embodiment of the Idea which must sunder itself into particular elements and then maintain its unity through them. Thus the separate individuals strive to unite. But they cannot succeed, or rather they do succeed, but only in a third individual, their child. This then steps forward as a new individual, while they, as all particulars, the contradiction of individual embodying universal, die.

The living thing dies because it is the contradiction of being an sich the universal or the genus while yet existing immediately as only a particular.

(EL, § 221, Addition)

Thus Hegel sees living things as an imperfect realization of the Idea. They are life, purpose intrinsic to matter. But they do not succeed in maintaining the unity or the eternity they seek. Unity and eternity here are linked, since eternity is unity over time. They achieve this thus only in a broken-backed way, an endless regress of succeeding generations. We have first the living thing deduced from the Concept, then we see it producing itself out of the inorganic. So we see that the Idea which produced it is really in it; it is Concept, Genus. As such it sunders itself and gives itself differentiated existence in the world. But it cannot come back from this and maintain its unity; or it can do this only in the broken-backed way of reproducing its kind, and then undergoing death, being succeeded by others.

But this unity is broken-backed because it is only an sich. It points beyond itself to the necessity of a unity für sich. There must be a way in which we can escape from the separation in particular beings, from being strewn in exteriority, to inwardness and unity. This step beyond the finite, which is realized an sich by death of particulars, the cancelling of their exteriority, is realized für sich by self-consciousness, by knowledge. Hence the rise of consciousness is related to death; it is the dialectically higher form of which death is the lower.16 It is the real immortality of living in Geist. And it is the next stage which is ineluctably pointed to by the consummation of life in the Genus.

The Idea of life has.. .thus freed itself not just from some one particular immediate ‘this’ but from this first immediacy as a whole; it thus comes to itself, to its truth; with this it steps out into existence as free genus on its own. The death of the merely immediate individual living being is the coming to be of spirit.

(EL, § 222)

Knowledge
So Life as immediate unity goes over into what Hegel calls Knowledge. This is really the subjectivity of the Idea, that wherein it shows itself not just as the inner rational formula of everything, but as a subject, which knows its own external reality; and which can thus be thought of as positing it as a subject does. That is why this section will deal not just with knowledge in the narrow sense, but with will as well.

In short we are showing how the category of consciousness or self-consciousness has a necessary application, because it is integral to the Idea. And because consciousness is necessarily finite, we are proving out of the Idea another feature of the world which was implicit in our starting point; the world of Being is for finite subjects, it is grasped in categories.

In the introductory passage in WL (n, 429–39) Hegel naturally cannot resist referring once more to Kant; and as usual with a mixture of plaudits and condemnation. Kant was certainly right against the former metaphysic, which wanted to understand self-consciousness as a soul which was necessarily simple. On the contrary, we see that consciousness is necessarily diremption, that which posits objectivity over against it; and which is in essential relation to objectivity.

What is basic is thus the polarity between subject and object. This Kant saw and made basic. But he drew from it the conclusion that subjectivity could never be understood, that it was merely the everywhere present unity of apperception which could never be an object of knowledge. The ‘inconvenience’ (Unbequemlichkeit) of the ‘I think ‘that it is always subject and never object; so that we are objects to ourselves only as empirical selves, not as the original subject; this Kant takes as a bar to knowledge of self-consciousness. But for Hegel this attitude was inexcusable. For in seeing that subject is necessarily polarization, that it necessarily must be subject confronted by object, far from having a bar to knowledge, we have a basic grasp of its real nature. This is what distinguishes it from a stone (WL, II, 432). We can only consider ourselves barred from knowing it if we take the basically Humean attitude that the subject is what must be known in inner intuition. Then of course, the T think’ escapes characterization, because it is the presupposition of all content. But if we try instead to conceive the subject, we have here the basic clue to its nature; self-diremption, that which gives itself a content; that which becomes for itself.

But this self-distinction must take two forms. The Idea is both self-knowledge in other, and self-creation in other. Hence its subjectivity has to be thought under two modes. It is both knowledge of itself as other; and also realization of itself as something independent of itself. In the absolute Idea, these two aspects are one. But this life has to be lived through finite subjects, for infinite subject can only be real through embodiment in finite subjects. This necessity of embodiment is what introduces opposition, opacity in the absolute subject. For finite subjects have to struggle to recover the transparency of the self-identity of the Idea. Or in other words the opacity which comes from the necessary external embodiment can be seen as the opacity inseparable from the thinking of finite, embodied subjects.

Hence the two aspects which are one in the Idea are separated in the life of finite subjects. These subjects have to win through to the difficult grasp of their unity, whereby at last the Idea has produced integral truth, a reality which is in conformity to it. This separation takes the form of a separation within each of the aspects. Finite subjects know the world, but they know it normally as separate, over against them. This is connected with their perceiving it as contingent, for they do not penetrate to its inner necessity, which is nothing other than the Concept, hence the very stuff of their thought.

At the same time finite subjects have a sense of the good. Hegel is here talking not just about some finite end, such as we discussed in external teleology, but about the absolute justified end, the creation of a world of truth, of conformity to the Idea, which is also the good. Now men have an inkling of this, too, as well as the idea of knowledge. But here too they misconstrue it as a merely finite end; one which is absolutely justified, but nevertheless the end of a finite subject, to be wrought ab extra on the world. (WL, II, 479); ‘here [the content] is indeed finite, but it is as such also an absolutely valid one’. Hence they oppose their activity to the as yet untransformed external world.

In other words the Idea yields the necessity of a unity in difference which is both a production of external embodiment and a knowledge of self in this external embodiment. So that finite spirit, as its vehicle, must know and strive; it has an Ideal of knowledge, and an Ideal of Good (which Hegel calls the ‘Ideas ‘of knowledge and the Good respectively in WL). But as finite it has both these ideals as perpetually unrealized ideals. Knowledge cannot come to full necessity; and striving always sees itself as unfinished.

Hegel puts it also this way: for knowledge, the important side is the objective side; the point is to conform our knowledge to the outside reality. For striving the important reality is subjective; it is the good which has to be realized in the world. The outside as yet untransformed reality is known by the striving subject as the ‘an sich null’ (nichtig, EL, § 225).

This leads to contradictions on both sides, which take the form of endless incapacity to reach the goal. In the theoretical domain, we never arrive at the necessity of things without transcending the partial, finite point of view. In the practical, the contradiction is even more marked.

As long as we remain finite agents of the good, then the good we achieve is open to all the accidents of fortune. It is a finite content, which can be destroyed by outer contingency or by evil. And worse, its conditions of realization can enter into conflict with each other (WL, II, 479–80).

But this is not yet contradiction. This comes to light when we see that the finite good will cannot reach full success. For if the world were quite transformed to conform with the good, then there would be no more striving. For the good will, by its very definition as finite will over against a world to be acted on, would not exist. (EL, § 234, Addition.)

Hegel is here once more criticizing Kant and Fichte, as he makes explicit in the Addition to the paragraph just quoted. The notion of morality as simply Sollen, as not being capable of fulfilment because then it would cease to exist as morality, is one of the basic oppositions which Hegel bent himself to overcome. But he now sees this contradiction of the endless progress of an ‘ought’ that never reaches fulfilment as intrinsic to the notion of a finite good will as such; since the idea of a finite good will is that of a will over against an external reality which it must be exercised on. What would become of morality if everything good were integrally and definitely realized?

The answer can only be a conception of the realized goal of morality which incorporates as an essential element our moral activity. This means a course of the world which is realized goodness, but which exists not in abstraction from our activity, but includes and is predicated on this activity. But this means a view of the good in which moral action is not necessarily the struggle against the im- or amoral reality which waits to be transformed; but can be the response which completes a context of realized goodness. This is of course a view of morality which must break with the Kantian opposition between the good will and inclination.

But this vision can be seen as the dialectical synthesis between the stance of cognition and the stance of will. As we saw above the former is the view that the external world is the essential, whereas we have to conform our minds to it in knowledge; the latter is the view that our project is essential, to which the world as the inessential, the ‘null’ (nichtig) must conform. The true solution which solves the contradiction is one which unites these two; which retains the essentiality of our project, and does not fall back into the error of knowledge which was to feel that we are out of the truth; while adding the truth of knowledge that the object or the world also is essential embodiment of the Idea.

We then have a notion of a course of the world which is the fully realized good – this we get from knowledge – but we do not think of ourselves as separate from this, so that we just have to try to conform ourselves in knowledge. An integral part of the world’s goodness, of its being the realized good, is that it incorporates our action for the good, our striving. The idea of the good as finite will retained the basic inadequacy of finite cognition that it held subject and world separate. Hence the subject could only be the good will by opposing itself to, working on, an unregenerate world. This is the subject defined by irreconcilable opposition to, difference from the object-the abiding sin of Kantian philosophy. This must be overcome.

And we know this must be overcome because we have understood that reality must issue from a conceptual necessity which is a subject, that therefore everything must be in its truth, i.e., conformity to the Idea; and hence that such a separation is nonsense, blind, obstinate nonsense. This is what mediates the transitions here. For Hegel the finite will just has to come to see that it is operating in a world in which the good is realized. In WL, Hegel makes use of the dialectical conclusion of the phase of External Teleology: that the means is the end, in order to show here that the means-activity that is the striving of the finite agent to the good, is not separate from the good, but identical with it. This unity is there an sich, it simply has to become für ihn. What is needed is to see this striving in perpetually unrealized causes, this imperfection constantly trying to rise above itself, as the realized goal of goodness itself.

For as we have seen, from the highest standpoint, imperfection, evil, opacity, separation, have their necessary place in the Hegelian course of things. Only by this exteriority, and hence division, opacity, suffering, can the good be realized. This is the vision which we finally climb to. ‘The null and the transitory constitute only the surface not the real essence of the world.’ (EL, § 234, Addition.)

In EL, § §233 and 234, Hegel presents the contradiction in a slightly different way. Finite will is the contradiction which holds that the world over against it is inessential, ‘nichtig’, and yet it is also essential, for without it this good will would not be.

We have seen how the dialectical synthesis of both attitudes, cognition and will, solves the problems of will as finite. This is, of course, a familiar theme with Hegel; it is one of the central ones, if not the central one of the PhG, under another name. Here it was a matter of the relation between consciousness and self-consciousness; the first being the attitude that set us opposite an essential world we have to conform to, the second being the certainty of self that sought to make good against an inessential world.

But we should also see how the synthesis solves the problems of finite knowledge. As long as the subject is over against a world from which he is forever separate because he cannot in any sense penetrate or be part of it, then the problem of knowledge is insoluble. We are forever shut out from the depths of things, from things as they are in themselves. We can only register certain facts, which remain for us contingent, brute facts, of which we cannot give the why? What enables us to go beyond this is that the world is not other to mind, to reason, to our reason; and it is not other because it is posited by that reason. Hence the finitude and limits of knowledge, too, can only be overcome by fusion with the other stance, that of striving, of the will to realize the good, which is the intelligible plan of things.

Of course, on the level of finite spirits, these two cannot coincide, for we only know in part, and we can only effect part of the whole plan; hence the two remain separate. We know much more than we can effect; and this we know externally. And we effect things which we do not really understand; and in this respect we act in the dark not seeing the real cosmic significance of what we do. But when we rise to the unconditioned, absolute subject then we see that the two come together and are both whole; as they must be.

This is the major drama of this chapter, which therefore culminates in Absolute Idea. But there is also a lot of detail. The chapter starts first with the Idea of the true (just ‘knowledge ‘in the EL) and goes on to develop the idea of the good (‘willing’ [das Wollen] in EL). Cognition passes first into willing, and then the transition out of willing to the next section takes place with the synthesis of the two.

We cannot go into the detailed development of cognition, which Hegel uses as a springboard to discuss analytic and synthetic knowledge.17 It culminates in the notion of a purely abstract necessity, one which is outside of the content of the world, or purely inner. Cognition is before a simply given world, one just ‘come upon’ (vorgefunden). The necessity is subjective, (EL, § 232); and this is what makes the transition to willing. We have seen how this in turn leads to a synthesis between the two; and so we climb to the speculative or absolute Idea (EL, § 235).

This [essence of the world] is the Concept existing an und für sich and so the world is itself the Idea. Unsatisfied striving ceases when we learn that the final purpose of the world is accomplished, even as it is perpetually accomplishing itself...But this agreement between what is and what ought to be is not torpid and without inner process; for the good, the end of the world, has being only while it constantly produces itself, and this difference remains between the spiritual and the natural worlds, that while the latter moves only in a recurring cycle, in the former at any rate progress takes place.

(EL, § 234, Addition.)

We have an ‘objective world whose inner ground and real subsistence is the Concept. This is the absolute Idea’. (WL, II, 483.)

Absolute idea
Thus we reach the absolute Idea which can be seen as the synthesis of knowledge and life, the unity für sich and the unity an sich of Concept with its object. It is soul, free subjective Concept. ‘All else is error, confusion [Trübheit], opinion, striving, caprice and transitoriness; the absolute Idea alone is being, imperishable life, self-knowing truth, and is all truth’ (WL, II, 484).

It is a self-determining (Selbstbestimmung) which sunders itself and comes back to unity with itself. Art and Religion are modes of its grasping of itself and its giving itself an adequate existence. But philosophy is the highest, purest way; for it is the way of the Concept itself. The Logic seizes the Idea in a pure and transparent way.

Thus logic presents the self-movement of the absolute Idea only as the original Word, which is an exteriorization or utterance [Äußerung], but one which in coming to be has immediately vanished again as outer; the Idea is therefore only in this self-determination, that it apprehend itself it is in pure thought, in which difference is not yet otherness, but is and remains perfectly transparent to itself.

(WL, II, 485)18

The Logic is the science of the Idea as the pure inner formula of necessity of the world, which thinks itself and produces a world which is in conformity with it. If this is the ontological truth, then it follows that we can follow this through the study of the different concrete dimensions in the world, the structure of nature, of spirit, in politics, history, the structure of the mind, and so on. All these must reveal the basic form of the Idea, that they are posited by the Idea. And this is what we shall discover in the other sciences which make up the Encyclopaedia, the philosophies of nature and spirit.

But there also must be a science which takes the inner formula not through its concrete outer embodiment, but through its inner conceptual structure; which deals therefore not in concrete descriptions but simply in categorial concepts, and which shows how these are bound together. Such a science is the Logic, and we have just gone through it. But it is not abstract, against the concreteness of other sciences. For it is concrete in the sense of presenting us with a self-sustaining whole; it presents us with the necessity that the Idea go into external reality, and come back to itself. Hence it presents us with no vision of the concept as abstract, but rather as fully concrete. But as the derivation of the structure of the universe in pure thought, in categorial concepts, it is a pure vision. It is as Hegel says ideally transparent, because it is nothing but thought of thought whereas all the other sciences are thought of some particular matter, which has contingent and not totally transparent content to it. The logic is pure thought. It is the inner life of God before the creation of the world, in the famous image which Hegel uses in the Introduction to WL.

In both Logics, Hegel terminates by a discussion of the ‘method‘, which is a kind of recapitulation of the whole procedure followed. In WL, this takes up a great deal of space, and is worth commenting on.

The method is the basic procedure; but we now know enough to know that this method is not externally chosen or applied to what we are studying; it is the internal movement of the categorial concepts. It is the movement of the Concept itself (WL, II, 486). It is not some kind of tool which can be separated from the knowing subject and the object reflected on.

We have to start with something immediate; but it must not be an immediacy of sense or representation, but of thought, hence a categorial concept (488). We need something which does not have itself to be derived, for otherwise we would never get started. The obvious candidate is ‘being’ itself, for we have here a categorial concept which all others seem to presuppose if they are to have any application at all; for if they are to have application, then there must be some object to which they apply.

Hence ‘being’ is a kind of absolute beginning, which does not seem to repose on anything else, as they all do on being. Of course this does not mean that our beginning is without presupposition, for it is not shown as a matter of necessity yet that things must be; this will come at the end when we close the circle. But we have a concept such that if anything is to be assumed, it is the one to start with. In a sense we can say of ‘being’ that it sums up, englobes within it all the other categories, it is their universal; but only in the abstract sense that it is what is common to them all in abstraction from their differences.

It is the whole in this abstract sense; and as the whole is not related to any other concepts outside it; it does not presuppose any others, as ‘cause’ for instance requires ‘effect’, or ‘essence’ requires ‘manifestation’. This Hegel sums up in the expression that ‘being’ is the abstract self-relation (die abstrakte Beziehung auf sich selbst). It is self-relation, because related to nothing else, but abstract because it is this only by being the abstract universal; without internal differentiation.

But as self-relation it is already implicitly totality, it is already the germ of the real infinite of self-related totality in system which the absolute will reveal itself to be. The absolute an sich is already there, what is going to follow is an inner development whereby it will get internally richer, and become the articulated absolute, or the absolute für sich.

But now as we have seen this simple universal goes over itself into differentiation, sundering, judgement. From the point of view of finite knowledge, the additional specific content which we have to add to the universal is found, or observed in reality. But we see that it comes out of the universal itself, that the universal itself goes over into its other. This is the dialectical movement in it. We saw that Being goes into the differentiation of Dasein, that Dasein goes into its other, and is contradictory, and so on in perpetual becoming and change.

Now this dialectic has usually been taken to show the nothingness either of the objects which it affects (as with the Eleatics for instance), or of the thought which encounters it (as Kant held, for instance). But both these views are mistaken. The result of the dialectic is not just negative, not just nothing, so that we have to go back to square one. Because the contradiction is a determinate one, the result is a new form. Hence Being becomes Determinate Being, which in turn as contradictory refers us to others, which are bound to follow it because of its inherently contradictory nature. This it is senseless simply to give up and conclude to Nothing. Moreover Nothing itself as we saw is not a stable stopping point, because being is inescapable. Nothing is only comprehensible as the negation of Being.

Thus the ordinary reaction before contradiction, to conclude to nothingness, will not work. It fails to work in both its forms. We cannot conclude to the nothingness of reality, without landing in the absurdity of Nothing. And we cannot conclude to the simple error of our thought, for we have seen that this contradiction is implicit in being itself. Our thought is neither just analytic nor synthetic, but both.

The contradictory is real, or the real (Being) with which we started is contradictory. This is what we are forced to accept. But if the contradictory is real, reversing the first development, then it must somehow be self-related, and not simply be dependent on others and still others in endless regress whereby we come to no firm basis. The second term, difference or contradiction or fragmentation, issues out of the first term, unity or Being, by a necessary movement. It is the other of the first. But it contains this first in itself, because it issues from it. If the positive or unity contains necessarily the negative or division in it, by a necessary movement, then the reverse is also true. Division must also come to unity (WL, II, 495–6).

In other words, being, real being turns out to be contradictory; but then contradiction must be real. Hegel speaks of this as a conversion or turning point (496, 497). It comes when we see the contradiction which strikes being not just privatively, as a disaster. But seeing that there must be some reality -else how could we be undertaking this enquiry? – we conclude that contradiction cannot be its demise or the proof of its impossibility, but rather its basis. And since contradiction is necessary becoming, inner conceptual necessity governing change or unfolding, we see this inner conceptual necessity as that which underlies all reality. In other words, we reverse the proposition, as we saw above, and in doing so substantialize the second term. Contradiction is now not just a predicate implying non-existence; but is itself a reality, a subject, an operating principle. Contradiction as necessary movement posits, or deploys Being.

So being is in contradiction. Because being cannot but be, therefore contradiction has reality. This, on closer examination, turns out to form a circle. Contradiction is that which dissolves, destroys being. But if being is and contradiction is nevertheless essential to it, then contradiction must also create being. So contradiction, necessary movement, deploys being.

We thus reach a third term (497) which is the restoration of the first. The negative is negated and comes back to the positive. We have once more Being, self-related, in this sense immediate, but now having contained and cancelled mediation in itself. It is ‘the immediate, but through cancellation [Aufhebung] of mediation, the simple through cancellation of difference, the positive through cancellation of the negative’ ( WL, II, 498). We have a return to self.

But this return can be seen from two sides. It can be seen as the return of pure Being to itself through the overcoming of mediation. That is, we can start with Being, see it break up into determinate beings, and then see these come back to unity through being linked in a necessary movement powered by contradiction. But in the course of doing this we discover that everything is as it is of necessity, following a necessary formula or Idea. And so we can also start with the Idea. We can see this go over into objectivity, hence exteriority and indifference; and then see the return as the recovery of unity with subjectivity, where the inner connection nevertheless becomes manifest.

These two ways of putting it correspond to the path of discovery, and the real ontological order, respectively (EL, § 242). In other words, the reversal of proposition by which we make the contradiction itself subject brings us to the true order of things. This contradiction properly understood will turn out to be the inner necessity, which is Concept, Idea, absolute subject.

This contradiction or negativity is

the simple point of negative self-relation, the innermost source of all activity, of living and spiritual self-movement, the dialectical soul which everything true has in itself and through which alone it is true.

(WL, II, 496)

The third term is then this subjectivity embodied; it is ‘the individual, the concrete, subject’ (WL, II, 499).

This basic necessity of return to self, or reversal, is the motor of the whole dialectic, its inner formula. But the science of Logic is not reached in one step. This necessity was discovered at the very beginning, as we saw, with the Infinity of Dasein. But although we then knew that reality had to be such a self-returning circle, that it had to be inner necessity of movement which is one with being, we had not yet got an adequate way of conceiving this reality. The one-storied categories of Being did not suffice; nor did the not properly unified categories of reflection. We knew that we were dealing with external reality, which is also inwardly bound by necessity; but we had yet to put these together in an adequate concept. In other words, we had only the formula of an adequate ontology; we had yet to work it out.

This dialectic is what we have followed through the various stages of the Logic, particularly Essence and the Concept. We find in the end that only a subject, a self-thinking rational necessity which posits necessarily an external world which it governs and in which it recognizes itself, that only this meets the bill; this is the Idea. But in the meantime we shall find that all the various other ways of conceiving it; as ground and grounded, appearance and law, cause and effect, force and expression, whole and part, inner and outer, all these show themselves to be inadequate. They do not meet their concept, and have to go under.

But each of these stages is in a sense the absolute. It is a manifestation of the whole system. It is an attempt to grasp the whole system which reverses on itself. And because the inner cohesion of the Idea also requires externality and division, each of these imperfect stages has a certain relative truth. Each ‘is an image of the absolute, but at first in a limited mode, so that it is driven onwards to the whole...’ (EL, § 237, Addition).

So the progress from stage to stage is a progress from totality to totality where each succeeding version is richer and more concrete, is closer to a real image of what the totality is. It is an enriching of our concept, in which greater extension means higher intensity. (WL, II, 502). We start off with simple Being, in which we have in a sense an image of the totality, for it is self-related. It suffers diremption into Dasein, but returns to itself in Infinity and Fürsichsein. This is richer inwardly. Finally we get to the Idea which is the richest of all. But in achieving this inner complexity we have also achieved greater inwardness, greater intensity of inner unity, hence in a sense greater interpenetration and hence higher simplicity. When we come to the end we have subjectivity, self-consciousness, which is the most complex unity, but at the same time the most simple, because it is totally transparent. It is a unity where the separation of parts, the mutual exteriority (Auseinandersein) is totally overcome. We come to the greatest articulation of our concept, but also the most intense unity and hence clarity and simplicity.

This is the point where we return through this great simplicity to Being again. Whereas each of the stages is a return, in the sense of being a model of the great necessary return, with the Idea we really bring it off. We have an adequate model of this return; and hence a real derivation of this simplicity of Being. With this we really close the circle. We not only show the necessity of a return which flows from the postulate of Being and the discovery of contradiction, but we achieve this return, with the idea of a necessity which must posit its own existence, a subject which must posit its own embodiment.

We only achieve the return of Being to itself with the Idea, that is, with the understanding that reality is the locus of a double movement, only one of which starts from Being. The other, which is the more fundamental one, starts from the inner necessity, from the Idea, itself. Thus being only returns to itself at the price of being dethroned or displaced as the real starting point of things.

Being breaks up into the complex multiplicity of determinate things. What we call its returning to itself is the recovery of the simplicity and unity of the category ‘being’ in spite of, or through this complexity. But this comes about through our seeing that the multiplicity of determinate beings is bound together by necessity. The real return to unity comes when we see this necessity as absolute. But if necessity is absolute, then everything that exists, all being, exists for a purpose. So that the starting point is really this purpose itself, the inner formula of necessity, or the Idea. The whole third book of the Logic shows that this reversal is essentially involved in the notion of absolute necessity, and hence it culminates in the Idea.

So Hegel has established his ontology. What is primary is subject or reason or conceptual necessity. These terms are inseparably linked. The essence of subjectivity is rational thought and the essence of rational thought is conceptual necessity. Or, alternatively, reason requires conceptual necessity. And so sovereign reason requires absolute necessity. But if necessity is absolute, then it must posit all reality to conform to it. It is thus purpose. And as thinking (conceptualized) purpose, it is subject.

This primary term, which can also be called the Concept or Idea, produces out of itself a real world. And this it does of necessity, since subjectivity, hence thought, reason or conceptual necessity, can only exist embodied. This embodiment has a necessary structure, that is, a structure it must have if it is to embody the Concept. Hence both that the world exists and what it is like are necessary, given that reason, subject, necessity must be. This embodiment as external negates the Concept, and hence negates itself since it only exists as posited by the Concept. This is why it is mortal, in perpetual movement, and in this movement returns to the Idea.

Thus what emerges from the Logic is Hegel’s vision in which the whole structure of things (including what is contingent) flows necessarily from the one starting point, that Reason (or spirit, or the Concept) must be.

But we have seen that in order to close the circle of necessity, in order to show that this ontology was not just an interesting and perhaps persuasive interpretation of things (another argument from design: things are just as they should be, if...), Hegel had to demonstrate this starting point itself, show it to arise inescapably out of the scrutiny of the finite. And this proof was doubly necessary: not just to convince others, but to fulfil one of the requirements of his ontology itself, which called for Spirit to return to full rational knowledge of himself through man.

It is this titanic, incredible task which Hegel has been struggling with in the Logic, and which he thinks himself to have realized. For in starting with Being, the simplest, emptiest, most inescapable postulate, that there is (some kind or other) of reality, he claims to have shown that the dependence of everything on reason or the Idea follows inescapably. Hence the circle is closed. Being, our starting postulate is swallowed up, in the sense that it is shown to exist necessarily. With this reversal, Hegel has established the circle of seamless necessity of which we spoke in Chapter III.

This concept of necessary existence, of course, will be hotly contested, and it is impossible to give a justification of it which is distinct from the entire argument of the Logic. But perhaps it is now a litle clearer what it means than it was in Chapter m. Necessary existence means first existence for a purpose, in order to fulfil a plan. That things exist necessarily means to begin with that they are posited. But it requires also that the plan or purpose be itself necessary, and this for Hegel means that it be derived from the notion of necessity, together with the related ones of reason, concept, subjectivity. To this we must add a third condition, that the plan or purpose is not that of a subject who exists separately from the world governed by it. The teleology is internal.

Now the ontology of necessary existence is one in which nothing is merely given, except that necessity must be. There is no being which is given, since everything which is derives from the necessary plan. The content of the plan is not simply given, since it derives from the nature of necessity. Everything that is, one might say, exists for the sake of necessity (or Spirit, or reason). And so at the foundation of all is a requirement, that conceptual necessity, or the subject, or reason be. Thus this necessity inheres in things. It is the intrinsic purpose of the whole.

Not only does reality exist of necessity, the ascending movement by which we rise from an external understanding of things to a vision of the Idea is itself part of the plan. A world issuing from rational necessity must be known rationally. Since the subjects who know are finite, they have to ascend in knowledge from a finite point of view which sees contingency to a vision of necessity. And in order that this ascent be fully rational, it has to be made throughout of necessary inferences. If it were not, then finite minds could never rise to rational certainty (through necessary argument) of rational reality (the necessary in things). But it is integral to the realization of the Idea that they do so. So that the rational inferences of the ascending movement are part of the necessary existence which the Idea deploys for us.

And this is another reason why the Idea as the final category includes all the earlier categories within it. Not only because they correspond to levels of being which issue of necessity from it, but because they are also stages of imperfect insight on the road of its return to itself out of finite consciousness. The error in these imperfect ways of seeing is thus not absolute, but simply consists in not seeing their partiality; not seeing, in other words, that what they apply to is itself partial, and an outwork of perfect necessity.

The Logic is thus meant to be the ascending movement which takes us from finite consciousness to the vision of things as issuing from the Idea. It is, once we have eliminated the PhG, the only serious candidate for this function in Hegel. Does it succeed?

It is evident from the above that a crucial factor in the answer will be what one thinks of Hegel’s proof of the contradictory nature of the finite which comes in the second chapter, on Dasein. For it is this contradiction on which Hegel’s attribution of necessity to the real is grounded. It is this which allows him to derive the category of Infinity as a self-subsistent whole whose deployment is governed by necessity. And at this point the decisive step has been taken, since the whole rest of the work can reasonably be regarded as a development of what is implicit in this notion of necessary totality, one in which the necessity is in things.

For this allows us to show that the various conceptions of Essence, which project some underlying foundation behind the external phenomena, are untenable, since they would separate the inner necessity from things. We derive from this that necessity must be manifest; and later that it must be absolute. And from the absoluteness of necessity, we derive that the totality is there in fulfilment of a purpose, that it is a subject which knows itself, and hence that it is grounded in an absolute Idea. In other words, quite early on in the Logic, with Infinity, we establish necessary connectedness as a criterial property of adequate categorial thought about the world. This then provides the motor for the dialectic which takes us through the rest of the work, and by which the higher categories are made in the end to reveal their dependence on the absolute Idea.

This means in practice that the Hegelian dialectic does not function throughout according to the formula described above in Chapter IX (and earlier in Chapter IV), whereby each term shows itself to be in contradiction, the attempt to resolve which generates a new term which reveals a fresh contradiction, and hence generates still another term, and so on. The opening passages do indeed follow this formula: the dialectics of Being and Nothing and of Dasein in the Logic, of consciousness in the PhG. Thus Being suffers the contradiction that it turns into its opposite, Nothing, and this forces us on to Dasein. To be, Being must be determinate. But then we encounter a fresh contradiction, which tells in the opposite direction, as it were, that Determinate Being contains its own negation and hence necessarily goes under. Under the impetus of these two opposed requirements – that Being must be determinate, and yet that its determinacy is mortal to it – we are pushed on to Infinity, the immortal, self-subsistent system of mortal dependent finite beings. But with Infinity we reach a term which does not suffer (although it contains) contradiction; rather it is a formula whose implications only need to be fully drawn out to bring us to the final reconciling synthesis.19

At this point there is still a lot to be done: much is implicit which has to be spelled out, and a host of categorial terms have yet to be considered. But the procedure from now on is not really that these new terms, once generated, reveal each a fresh contradiction which pushes us on to the next, as Hegel seems to have thought. It is much more that these higher categories are brought before the bar of Infinity and its successor terms, that is, before the concept of a self-subsistent chain of necessary changes, and shown to be inadequate. In the process the vision of self-subsistent necessity is enriched from Infinity up to the absolute Idea.

What from time to time appear like fresh contradictions and hence independent bases of argument, other than this development of the implications of necessary totality, such as the conflict between sufficiency and informativeness in Ground, or the ‘incommensurability’ of ordinary judgement and reasoning to self-sufficient necessity as a criterial property of thinking in Subjectivity, turn out on examination to be dependent on this main line of argument. It is quite likely that Hegel did not think they were so dependent. This seems quite plausible in the case of the ascent through Judgement and Syllogism in Subjectivity. But it may have been as well that many transitions, e.g. from Measure to Essence, from Cause to Interaction, from Possibility and Reality to Necessity, were understood by him as semi-independent of this main conclusion of necessary totality, that they fed into it without relying on it. But this independence would be very difficult to sustain. In fact most of these arguments collapse ignominiously without the underlying premiss of ontological necessity.

If this interpretation is right, then the crucial support for the whole edifice of Hegel’s system reposes on the argument in Dasein on the contradiction of the finite. For those who like myself find this argument unsuccessful, Hegel’s demonstration of his ontology can only have the force of a more or less plausible interpretation of the facts of finitude, the levels of being, the existence of life and conscious beings, the history of man, as ‘hints and traces’ of the life of an absolute subject, deployed in the world.20

But although this might be satisfactory for a Romantic view it was radically insufficient for Hegel. Spirit must come to full rational self-knowledge in man. And this means that man must come to rational certainty about the absolute. If this kind of certainty, founded on rigorous argument, is not possible, but only an interpretive vision, then Hegel’s synthesis breaks asunder.

Either God does not come to full rational self-knowledge, but only a profound and not fully articulable intuition of his nature, and we slide towards a Romantic pantheism. Or God comes to rational self-clarity but beyond man and hence beyond the world (since man is the only worldly self-consciousness); and we slide towards orthodox theism. In one case we sacrifice the principle of rationality, in the other the principle of embodiment. They can no longer be held together.

But even those who draw this dismaying conclusion will find in the Logic an immense tissue of restless argument, which even though it does not reach its appointed conclusion, leaves no reference point of the European philosophical tradition untouched, unexplored, unshaken. The enormous energy of thought, struggling with the raw material of argument to make it yield an impossible conclusion, has generated a profusion of unforeseen lines of reasoning which have yet to be properly explored.

 

 

1 The German word ‘Besonderes’, cognate with our English word ‘sunder’, carries this sense of self-diremption as well as the ordinary logical meaning, giving Hegel that speculative play on words he so enjoyed.

2 Cf. e.g., EL 164.

3 The point was anticipated by Herder in his Essay on the Origin of Language. To have linguistic consciousness of something is to identify it by a criterial mark (Merkmal).

4 Philosophical Investigations, I, paras 258 ff.

5 Why Hegel feels entitled to make this assumption, we shall discuss below.

6 As a a matter of fact, this section has a lot in common with Essence, since we have the relation of two moments which are not really shown as identical, until we transcend this part to Syllogism.

7 William Wallace translation.

8 WL, II, 351; also EL, § 192.

9 Of this we shall see examples later in the next division, e.g., the note to EL, § 198: The individual (particular) is connected through the system of needs, civic society (specificity) with the state (universal). But at the same time the individual will is what actually relates the two, which satisfies needs in the society, and gives the Right of this society reality. But thirdly the state is the substantial middle term which holds both individuals and their civil society in a coherent whole.

10 The notion of affinity belongs here, which played a certain role in the literary life of the period. Cf. Goethe’s novel, Elective Affinities.

11 Analogous influences are communicated in the spiritual sphere between persons, as in a resistanceless medium, e.g., ideas, styles. WL, II, 365–6.

12 In the human realm this takes the form of fate: Cf. WL, II, 370, where Hegel points out that natural objects go under in an external and contingent manner, because externality and contingency is their own immediate nature. But men have a fate because they act out of their universal nature, and yet inevitably sin against this nature, fate being the retribution of the genus on the particular acting man. Thus for man what happens to him, what undoes him has meaning for him; hence he has a destiny, which things do not.

13 Hegel speaks of the relations between these as exemplifying three syllogisms wherein each is in turn the middle term; this is analogous to the individual in civil society and the state.

14 Hegel gives credit to Aristotle ; but also to Kant. For Kant had the idea in his third Critique of a unity between concept and intuition in which the two were not separated, but fused. The content is not just an example subsumed under a general concept, so that the two remain separate, but the form is somehow intrinsic to the content; it would not be the same without this particular content. But Kant is berated, of course, for holding his reflective judgement apart from determining judgement, and for refusing teleology a place – and indeed, the place of honour – in the order of things.

15 This notion of a goal which is always realized and yet to be realized is the basis of the crucial concept of Hegel’s political philosophy, as we shall see in the next part. This is the notion of ethical life (Sitdichkeit). It is what takes us beyond a mere morality of what ought to be, a striving after which never is fulfilled because it is not grounded in the nature of things, which is thus the particular goal of External Teleology.

16 Death is the natural immediate negation of the particular. We need a standing negation, self-consciousness. Cf. the dialectic of master and slave, PhG, 145.

17 In the discussion on analytic knowing in WL, Hegel returns to a discussion of the famous Kantian claim that mathematical propositions such as 7+5 = 12 are synthetic (446-9). For Hegel they are analytic; and cannot but be because they involve no ‘conceptual’ element at all; they are purely abstract like all quantity. Hence it is quite inappropriate to ask whether ‘7+5’ and ‘12’ have the same or different content. But Hegel is not just deducing his conclusion here out of his prejudice against mathematical philosophy. His argument is interesting.

When we say 7+5 = 12, we are saying that if you take seven, and add ones five times to it, then the answer is twelve; ‘7+5’ is thus not a description which could contain ‘12’ or not, it is simply a set of instructions (an Aufgabe) to add five to seven. These instructions presuppose a set of accepted operations by which they are to be carried out, which are simply those involved in counting; to follow these instructions correctly is to get to 12. There is nothing synthetic here in the Kantian sense because there is no predication, indeed no description in the normal sense. We have here no theorem, only an Aufgabe.

18 A. V. Miller translation (amended), in Hegel’s Science of Logic, London, 1969, 825.

19 Similarly, in Chapter i of the PhG, Hegel showed that there is no pure awareness of particulars, but that we always designate by universals. But then in the dialectic of Perception he shows that the universal cannot be designated independently of the world of particulars. The difficulty of combining these two requirements, i.e., of combining the particular thing and its properties, is what pushes us on to force, and eventually to the self-repulsion of the identical, and hence self-consciousness. The rest of the PhG as a largely interpretative dialectic ‘coasts’ on this initial set of transitions.

In comparing the two works we can see that the weakness in the opening arguments of the PhG, mentioned at the end of Chapter IV, that it seems to assume the requirement of necessary explanation, is at least meant to be repaired in the Logic by the capital transition to Infinity.

20 Hegel throughout the Logic faces the difficulty that the basic ontological structure he means to establish is more readily visible ‘high’ in the scale of being – e.g., in living beings, or conscious subjects – while his enterprise demands that he establish this ontology first at the lowest level, with simple Determinate Being. So that the examples he needs to give his thesis plausibility are in a sense not apposite when he really needs them.

Thus Hegel from time to time finds himself drawn to illustrate a category with an example from a much higher sphere. In discussing Being-for-self, he refers us to the ‘I’ in talking of polar opposition, he not only cites the examples of the magnet and electricity, but also of virtue and vice, truth and error, nature and spirit.

The dilemma Hegel finds himself in can be put in this way. On one hand he holds that the lower forms of simply material reality are imperfect manifestations of the basic ontological reality which comes out most clearly in spirit. Hence the centring of the solar system around the sun is a reflection of the centring of subjectivity, but imperfect in the sense that it is a centring in external space, not conscious of self. Similarly, we might think of the struggle between fire and water as the imperfect manifestation on their level of the struggle between opposites which comes out best in the spiritual realm.

But on the other hand, it is not enough just to hint at the truth in a sort of hermeneutic of natural science, one in which we point to the ‘signs’ in natural things of their ontological relation to the Idea. Rather to have to demonstrate this ontology. And the demonstration has to be made at the level of the lowest categories, those which apply to everything, and not just to animals, men, society. For otherwise we will not have shown the categories which Hegel draws from the life of subjects to have truly universal, cosmic application.

Thus, for instance, with material oppositions like fire and water, we have imperfect, unclear manifestations where the basic ontological structure is not transparent. And this opacity is what makes it difficult if not impossible to demonstrate this structure in lower, material things. And yet it must be demonstrated here, if we are to prove that nature is an emanation of spirit and hence that we are justified in explicating virtue and vice, or body and soul, or birth and death in terms of this structure as Hegel does. The Hegelian ontology is easy to expound in relation to spiritual beings, but has to be proved first in an ascending dialectic which starts with mere determinate beings, where on Hegel’s own theory it is imperfectly and unclearly manifested.

This poses a dilemma for Hegel’s enterprise, which he hopes to avoid by the proof of contradiction in finite being. If this proof is unconvincing, then there is a gap in his argument which he can only make up by borrowing, as it were, on his later ontological conclusions. But this loan is from a bankrupt bank, for these conclusions are themselves founded on the supposed pervasiveness of contradiction in finite being.

 
    