## CHAPTER XVII
## Art
1
The state is the highest realization of the human community on earth. We can say that it is the highest form of human life, if we consider life-forms as a whole. But it is not yet the highest realization of spirit. For the goal of Spirit is to come to a full, that means rational, knowledge of self. We can see the state as developing in history in conformity with a plan which culminates in this self-knowledge of Geist. We saw in Chapter XIV how the basic structures of the state can be deduced from the requirements of this culmination.

But this final stage of Spirit’s self-realization cannot be provided by the state. True, the state is in a sense an expression of the Idea. It is the Idea embodied in a common mode of life. It is objective spirit. But what we need now is another mode of expression which will be a vehicle of self-understanding, of pure self-contemplation. And this takes us beyond the state whose achievement is rather to realize the Idea in practices and institutions.

And the self-knowledge of Spirit must go beyond the state in another respect as well. The political community is substance of a certain people at a given epoch. But the cosmic spirit which must come to recognize himself underlies not just my own community but all of history, and beyond this the whole universe.

What is needed therefore is a mode of consciousness, which is a consciousness of the whole, the Absolute, or the very basis of things. As Hegel puts it in the Encyclopaedia,

The thinking spirit of world history, in that it strips off at once the limitations of particular Volkgeister and its own reality, grasps its concrete universality and raises itself to the knowledge of absolute spirit, as of the ever real truth, in which knowing reason is free für sich, and necessity, nature and history only serve to reveal it and as vessels of its praise.

(EG, § 552)

This will be, of course, a mode of human consciousness, but in this man will be the vehicle of Geist, and this will become clear as this consciousness reaches its highest forms. This self-knowledge of God through man, Hegel calls absolute spirit. It is ‘absolute’ because it is the final, highest realization of Spirit, that for the sake of which all the rest comes to be, and in this sense the foundation. (For the absolute is ‘essentially result’ – PhG, 21.)

Absolute spirit takes three forms, which are, in ascending order of adequacy, art, religion and philosophy.

Absolute spirit is thus higher than Spirit’s realization in objective reality which has not yet come to full self-consciousness. But this is not to say that it comes to fruition after the state in history. On the contrary, both the state and the forms of absolute spirit go through a historical development from the most primitive to the highest forms. And their development is intertwined. The forward movement of each requires that of the others. We saw in Chapter XIV how men’s concrete modes of life in the world had to reach a certain stage of rationality before they could be fit vehicles of the self-knowledge of Geist. And reciprocally, they must have reached a certain stage of religious and philosophical development if they are to be capable of sustaining a rational state. Thus Europe had to go through the Reformation before the rational law-state could be built. The Catholic variant of Christianity was not yet purified of its intrication with external forms, with sacraments and priestly power. Thus the Catholic church is led to fight the state for earthly supremacy instead of accepting that the earthly realization of the Christian community is in the state. Hence Catholic countries remain unpropitious ground for the modern state.

This also means that the higher dignity, as it were, of absolute spirit as the highest realization of Geist takes nothing away from the supremacy of the state. For true religion does not oppose the state, rather it underpins its authority as the highest realization of the Idea in a whole life-form. Of course, obedience to the state is an old injunction in Christendom, in honour above all in the Lutheran countries. But here the idea is not that the Church underpins the state as the regent of a less important world, while it turns its attention to higher things. The state is the highest realization in external, historical life; and also the essential locus in which the internal life of thought and self-understanding of Spirit takes place. Where the state is raw and undeveloped, the church cannot substitute for it, for in those ages Spirit’s self-understanding, i.e., religious life, is also raw and undeveloped. The blind cannot lead the blind. (Of course, it attempts to do so, as we saw with the Medieval church; and this turns the mill of Geist. But this is another example of the cunning of Reason.) In fact, Geist’s self-knowledge must fit harmoniously into the highest form of life attained by his vehicle, man.

2
Absolute spirit has three levels. The only fully adequate self-understanding of Geist is one which is couched in pure conceptual thought. In thought, Spirit is fully at home, it is fully self-transparent. The divine is ‘in its truest form, in the element which is most its own, in the form of thought’ (I & I, 154).

Hegel has a notion of conceptual thought as self-transparent which we find it hard to share today. Much of contemporary philosophy has been concerned with showing how the clarity of our most explicit conceptual formulations reposes on a background of which we are not fully aware and which we can perhaps never exhaustively explore. Much that is implicit, for instance, in the very system of concepts or classifications that we use to formulate our clearest thought remains unstated and possibly unstatable. In very different ways, Wittgenstein, Heidegger, Polanyi and Merleau-Ponty, for instance, have explored this avenue of the limits of the explicit or of clear explanation. The important issue which is at stake between Hegel and contemporary philosophy will emerge more clearly below. For the moment, I would like to take Hegel’s notion of total clarity as a reference point from which to account for the lesser modes of absolute spirit.

The full transparency of thought is found in philosophy. But in default of such clear concepts, and while groping on their way to them, men use unclear modes of representation. This was the domain for which Hegel used the term ‘representation’ (Vorstellung), which he opposes to thinking (Denken). In order to avoid confusion with the usual, more general sense of the term ‘representation’, I shall use the German word ‘Vorstellung’ for Hegel’s term of art.

The domain of Vorstellung is the domain of religious thought. Here men think of God not in clear concepts but in images. These provide, as it were, a partly opaque medium which prevent us from grasping God and his relation to the world in full clarity. Their opacity comes from the fact that these images have a primary meaning by means of which they refer us to their ultimate meaning. Since the properties of the primary domain are not the same as those of the ultimate domain, the images are never fully adequate. Either they are misleading, or we have to make allowances, to leave a margin of the unexpressed, or the mysterious.

As an example we can take the Hegelian interpretation of the story of the Fall of man in Genesis. The fall properly understood is the movement whereby man turns against the universal, and affirms himself as a particular. This is represented in religious imagery, or Vorstellung, as the fruit of an act, the sin of Adam, which might not have happened, and which occurred at the beginning.

Now the speculative truth we are trying to express here is that man, as a finite spirit, has to turn away and be cut off from infinite spirit; that the very assertion of self as finite spirit requires this ‘fall’ (cf. PhG, Chapter VII). In other words, this is necessary and fundamental to finite spirit. But this truth cannot be said in full clarity until one has the philosophical language of necessity, finitude, infinity, universal, particular, and so on. In the cruder medium of a narration, the necessary and fundamental comes out as something which happened temporally at the beginning, but which has great and lasting consequences. Given the properties of the primary domain here, which is a narrative of action, this is the only way we can render the insight that something is fundamental to the relation of man and God.

Of course, once Hegelian philosophy comes along to interpret Christian theology, we can distinguish clearly what the properties of this inadequate medium are and how much it distorts. But those who are entirely immersed in religious consciousness without benefit of philosophy cannot grasp its limits. Either they take it as undistorted truth (e.g., take the Bible literally), or they recognize that something is left unsaid, and conclude that God is to this extent unknowable.

Vorstellung is thus below thought, and religion is a less adequate level of absolute spirit than philosophy. But it is not the lowest level. For Vorstellung is still thought in a broad sense, that is, it is an inner representation in ideas of the reality, even if the ideas are interlaced with images and unclear. And in this way, it partially meets the demands of Geist, which as spiritual strives to know itself in the inwardness of thought. But there is a still lower level, where the images instead of being in inner thought, deployed in a discourse of myth or theology, are simply out there in the world, in sensuous form, as objects of intuition.

Now when the absolute, Geist, or the truth that the world emanates from Spirit, is presented out there in sensuous reality, we have the domain of art. This is what art is, in Hegel’s view. No matter what the subject of a work of art is in the ordinary sense, the quality of beauty, that which draws us and delights us, comes from the manifestation of the Idea which it embodies in sensuous form. Beauty is the ‘sensible manifestation of the Idea’ (das sinnliche Scheinen der Idee, I & I, 163). In its journey from unconsciousness to perfect self-knowledge, Spirit must start here, with a mode of consciousness which is purely intuitive, and bound up with the external and sensuous.

Now in speaking of art as a sensuous presentation of the Idea, or as the ‘intuitive consciousness of absolute spirit’ (I & I, 151), is Hegel returning to the traditional notions of aesthetic according to which art is primarily to be understood as mimesis, or imitation of the real? Most decidedly not. Hegel has in fact incorporated the aesthetic theories of Kant and Schiller, as well as the new departures of the Sturm und Drang, and builds his views on them.

Kant in his third critique strongly rejected the presumption of the Wolffian Enlightenment, expressed in the works of Baumgarten, that art is to be understood as a mode of confused (that is, non-distinct) cognition. Kant rejects both this intellectualist aesthetic and that of sensationalists, like Hume and Hutcheson, who would relate aesthetic experience to the human psyche and its capacities of sensation. The aesthetic experience, Kant argued, is the experience of pleasure which comes from the harmony between imagination and understanding when we contemplate an object. Certain objects by their form exhibit, as it were, an effortless accord with our understanding.

But against the intellectualists Kant holds that this accord is not accompanied by a concept; it does not involve subsuming the object under a concept. It is not a mode of knowing. Against the sensationalists he argues that this pleasure is not a satisfaction which relates to our de facto needs and desires. It is quite disinterested. It is not a pleasure we take in the possession, or even in the existence of the object, but purely in the play of our faculties of representation which it occasions. And it is valid a priori, for it relates to the a priori structure of the faculty of knowledge itself. The aesthetic judgment of beauty is paradoxically both subjective (not involving knowledge) and universally valid (a priori).

We have already seen how much Hegel’s philosophy as a whole owes to Kant’s third critique, both directly and via Schiller’s work. It will come as no surprise that his aesthetics is particularly indebted to both. Hegel too sees beauty arising where the sensuous and the ideal come together. He too sees the work of art as exhibiting a finality (Zweckmäßigkeit), and he agrees with Kant that this finality cannot be explained by an external purpose, like well-being, that the work of art serves; nor can we impose on it a conceptual definition of the purpose, for this on Hegel’s view would take us out of the domain of art. Hegel in other words has incorporated Kant’s paradoxical formulation about the work of art as exhibiting a ‘finality without purpose’ (Zweckmäßigkeit ohne Zweck). Indeed, this formulation is one of the sources of the central Hegelian category of internal teleology.

For this is the idea of an entity exhibiting a purpose which is not external to it, but rather where the life of the whole is the purpose by which we account for any partial process. This internality of purpose figures in Kant’s notion of the beautiful object, for it is beautiful not in virtue of any utility. This is part of what he means by ‘finality without purpose’. It reflects his rejection of psychologistic theories and his defense of the disinterestedness of aesthetic experience. But Kant’s phrase also contains the anti-intellectualistic point that no conceptual formulation of the finality of an object of beauty is possible. This idea re-appears transformed in the Hegelian category of Internal Teleology in the notion that Spirit only comes to an adequate definition of self through the perfection of its external embodiment. In other words no adequate conceptual definition can be given of the Idea which is not manifest in its embodiment. Thus the teleology of Geist is internal not only in the sense that no external purpose is served, but also in the sense that no prior external definition of the purpose is possible. Geist’s embodiment in a rational universe is not only the fulfilment of his rationally necessary plan, the Idea, but also the paradigm expression of what that purpose is, which cannot be pre-empted by merely conceptual formulation, but whose perfection philosophy must follow, as the owl of Minerva taking wing at dusk.

Hegel’s category thus supplements Aristotle with an idea drawn from Kant, finality without purpose; and he supplements Kant with the expressivist theory, which we explored in the first chapter. So that finality without purpose becomes the ‘self-purpose’ (Selbstzweck) of Hegelian philosophy, which Hegel applies to those realities which must be seen as paradigm expressions of their own ends, which include the state as well as works of art.

Thus Hegel’s ontology has one of its roots in Kant’s aesthetic. And this while bringing him close to Kant’s theory of art is the source of their divergence. For Hegel art is a vehicle of ontological vision. Kant most of the time1 wants to see the beauty of objects as something quite unconnected with what we see in or through them.

But in this Hegel is not returning to the intellectualist tradition or the view of art as mimesis. Art is a mode of consciousness of the Idea, but it is not a representation of it. The distinction which comes to Hegel out of the expressivist revolution in thought underlies his theory of art.

Let us see more clearly what is involved in this distinction. We saw in the previous part how practices could be seen as the expression of certain ideas, unmatched by any parallel attempts at conceptual formulation. In this sense a certain practice of decision by voting and representative assemblies can be seen as embodying certain ideas about will, the individual and his relation to society, for which we might have no adequate theoretical formulation. It could thus be seen as a mode of (not explicidy formulated) consciousness of ourselves as individuals in society, which was not however a representation, that is, a description or portrayal of us as individuals in society, or indeed of anything at all.

But as we have already seen, these manifestations of objective spirit while being defensibly classed as modes of consciousness are not vehicles of understanding, or contemplation. The consciousness is one merely implicit in action and the norms of action. But at the highest level Spirit has to come to self-contemplation. Is there a mode of contemplative consciousness which is not representation?

The answer is that there is, and it is art. A Bach cantata, for instance, conveys a certain vision of God, of Christ and man’s salvation. But it does not portray, describe or offer a representation of these. The only thing it might be thought to portray is a man praying. But this would be wrong too. It does not portray prayer. One might be tempted to say it is prayer. But this is not so either, however much it may owe its origin to prayer-forms (as more obviously, a setting of the Mass does). For we listen to it, and though we may be inspired by it to pray, and make of it a prayer, it can just be listened to. It is a kind of presentation of prayer, and through that of man’s relation to God, which we can contemplate. If it were a prayer-form or a rite, the consciousness of God would be implicit in a practice, as with the manifestations of objective spirit above. But as a work of art, in the modern sense, it is offered as something to contemplate, in this case hear.

The fact that a cantata can only with difficulty be thought of as portraying anything is not the important point here. For a similar point can be made about, e.g., a painting of the Crucifixion, which clearly does portray something, viz., Christ on the Cross. It may be said of a given painting that it presents a vision of God or of suffering, but this is not what is portrayed in any straightforward sense. The only temptation to speak of these as portrayed comes from the fact that something is represented, the man on the cross, and the deeper vision can be thought of as shown through this. But this temptation disappears altogether with a work like a cantata.

An analogous point can be made about a novel, which narrates and hence portrays action and feeling, but which can present a vision which goes beyond these. Even if Tolstoy had not added passages of theoretical exposition to War and Peace, we would still take from it his vision that great men do not design and control history as their admirers think, that they are rather thrown up on the crest of deeper waves. But this is not described in the novel, as the actions and thoughts of the characters are.

This underlies the Hegelian view of the distinction between art and the higher levels of absolute spirit. Both philosophy and religious Vorstellung are representations (in the broad sense, not the particular Hegelian usage). They characterize the absolute in declarative sentences which are intended as correct description. On one level, at least, it is clear what they say, the level of the actual words they use, although their recourse to images may raise difficulties of interpretation when we want to go further – as we find in fact with religious Vorstellung.

By contrast the work of art does not ‘say’ anything in a straightforward sense at all. The message or vision is one we see in it, and any statement of its content is the fruit of interpretation and subject to challenge and perpetual reformulation.

The central contrast between conceptual description and artistic presentation of the absolute can thus be seen in this way: in philosophy my awareness of the absolute is couched in concepts, the inner, transparent vehicles of thought whose function is to point beyond themselves to a domain of objects they correctly portray or characterize. In art, my awareness is embodied in a work, an external, sensuous object, which by no means simply refers me beyond itself to something it describes, but rather lets us see the absolute only through its presence as a sensuous object. In descriptive discourse, we frequendy remember what was conveyed while forgetting the words used or even what language was spoken. But the ‘message’ of a work of art does not survive the eclipse of its sensuous medium, or only in an emasculated way.

Religious Vorstellung would then be intermediate between the two extremes. Like philosophy it talks of God in declarative, descriptive sentences. But it uses images, like art, in which the absolute is portrayed only through the properties of another domain.

Hence art is lower than philosophy or religious Vorstellung because it does not characterize or describe the absolute, but only bodies forth an awareness of it which is non-representative. Hegel speaks of it not as ‘Vorstellung’ (representation), but ‘Darstellung’ (presentation), or as ‘Scheinen’ (showing forth or manifesting) of the Idea in sensible form (Gestalt). The work of art has a certain inner luminosity, as it were. It manifests the spiritual at every point on its surface, through its whole extent. Everything in it is there in order to show forth the Idea.

That is why the work of art is incomparably higher than the works of mere nature however much we may have been misled by the theory of art as imitation to praise the works of nature as higher than those of man. It is true of course that nature is an embodiment of spirit in sensuous form. In particular a living being is such an embodiment, and at the summit, man is the highest. But this is still not the same as art. Even the most perfect human form still has much in it which is purely contingent, that is, not rigorously necessary to its vocation of embodying Geist And even in regard to what is necessary, the necessity is not manifest, it is inner; that is, it is discovered by thought, but is not there on the surface of things. Before natural living beings, we come to a ‘presentiment’ (Ahnung) of the concept, but we have no clear manifestation of it (I & I, 168–86).

In order to have such a sensuous manifestation men have to create a work of art. This is thus not simply an imitation of nature, of which the most perfect realization would be simply another specimen of what is portrayed. Art leaves something out, but it does so with the aim of creating an object which in all its aspects makes apparent the necessity of Geist. A work of art is thus inhabited totally by an inner necessity; and Hegel speaks of it as Selbstzweck. The inner necessity means that all parts exist for the sake of embodying the whole message. But this message is not beyond it, but in it. We have thus a case of inner teleology; the art work is to be compared to the living being. And Hegel as we saw, adopts Kant’s formula, in seeing in the work of art a ‘finality without purpose’ (Zweckmäßigkeit ohne Zweck). But unlike the organism, it is fully manifestation, it is nothing but manifestation of the Idea. It is free infinity (I & I, 166). What a living being is in reality, in itself, the art work shows forth. Its entire existence is to show this inner necessity forth. To see this fully manifest in the sensuous exalts us. It is the beautiful. And because the sensuous is here to manifest the Idea, art is ‘disinterested’, the sensuous in art is not an object of desire (I & I, 65, 167).

Because art is merely presentation and not a representation of spirit our vision in art will always defy exact definition. And for the same reason it will always lack the reflective clarity of the higher levels. When we describe by declarative sentences, we can reflect on the descriptive terms we apply, clarify their criteria, and hence our grounds for their use. But the artist cannot be that clear about why he uses this pattern, or tone or word. If he has articulated reasons for these, they will generally refer to the aesthetic force of this or that alternative, not to the truth of the embodied vision.

Thus in art we reach a vision of things which is maximally unreflective, unaware of what underlies the coherencies it embodies in the work. The artist follows a ‘necessity’ which he cannot grasp, and Hegel speaks of ‘the inspiration of the artist’ as ‘a force foreign to him’ (eine ihm fremde Gewalt, EG, § 560). Considered a revealer of deep truths, the artist walks as though in a dream. He is a somnambulist. Reflective unclarity matches the enigmatic, disputable nature of what is said.

This lack of definition of the message is essential to art. Hegel points out that a work of art which is merely meant to say something which is already clear in thought is without interest. In other words, lack of definition and reflective unclarity are essential to art because it is a mode of consciousness embodied in an external work, rather than in the inwardness of conceptual description. Where we are conceptually clear, the work is superfluous. It becomes, as Hegel says, an empty husk (I & I, 44). Greek poetry and art is great because it was not rendering a teaching which was already abstractly formulated in ‘universal religious propositions’, but rather because the poets ‘could work what fermented in them into external expression only in this form of art and poetry’ (I & I, 152).

Because our awareness of the absolute is tied in this way to an external object, Hegel speaks of art as the ‘intuitive’ level of consciousness of Spirit (I & I, 151; EG, § 556). And this is why absolute spirit must go beyond the level of art. It is still caught in external, sensuous reality. It is not yet fully ‘bei sich’ in its own element, which is thought. In thought, one’s ideas follow a necessity one understands, rather than one which is obscure and enigmatic. In this sense, thought is free, and man as a spiritual being is only free when he thinks (Im Denken bin ich frei, PhG, 152). For he follows a necessity which springs from itself. Spirit will thus have to go beyond art to a more ‘spiritual’ (geistig) unity with nature in thought (EG, § 557).

This according of primacy to conceptual clarity is of course consistent with Hegel’s basic ontology. But it gives a decisive twist to his theory of art. And this seems to align him again with the intellectualists. But Hegel as we saw was in no sense a protagonist of the kind of intellectualism we find with Wolff and Baumgarten. On the contrary he was the heir of both Kant and the Sturm und Drang. A work of art was not a confused representation, but rather a mode of consciousness which is not representative.

Hegel owed this idea to the developing expressivist current of thought. Prior to this consciousness was always thought of as representative. A good illustration of the shift involved in expressivist thought can be found in Herder’s reflections in his essay On the Origin of Language. Previously, as Herder points out, the problem of learning language was seen as one of co-ordinating signs and things. But this is to take the relation of referring between signs and things for granted as something already understood. And this is precisely the most problematic thing in language.

So Herder turns his attention to the birth of linguistic consciousness, the kind of awareness of things which grasps them through signs. This makes us look on language in a completely new light. Instead of seeing it as an assemblage of signs co-ordinated with things, we see it rather as the necessary embodiment of a certain form of consciousness, which in this case is that form in which there are such things as signs for us.

But once one comes to see the external embodiments of thought not just as referential signs, but as vehicles of different forms of consciousness, there is no reason why one cannot see these forms as extending beyond representative ones, where we use terms to describe something. Hence we can come to see the work of art not just as obscure representation, but as the vehicle of another kind of awareness.

Now seeing the expressions of thought as embodiment of different kinds of awareness opens a second dimension in our consideration of language, and a second type of relation to the extra-linguistic reality it is meant to express. The obvious such relation is the representative one. Words describe or characterize something. They are faithful to this to the extent that they correctlly portray it, that what we assert with them corresponds to what is the case.

But as an embodiment of awareness, a given formulation in words can also be related to the dim, pre-linguistic hunch or intimation which it is meant to express. Here, too, there is a question of fidelity to an extra-linguistic term. But this is not a matter of correct portrayal. We are not trying to describe the hunch-this would be very difficult, perhaps impossible – but to explicit faithfully and make clear what it intimates.

Now sometimes both these dimensions are relevant. Following an initially unclear intuition we elaborate a new descriptive language, and what we say in this corresponds well or badly, more or less with what is the case. But it can be that the descriptive dimension does not apply. And this is what we see with the work of art as understood above. For this, too, attempts to render faithfully an initially obscure inspiration. In doing so, it brings it to open expression and hence to a higher level of awareness. And yet it is not to be judged as description or portrayal.

The work of art renders something, is faithful to something. But what it is faithful to it does not describe. If this initial inspiration can be thought of as a sense of reality, or of the Absolute, then the work of art is a vehicle of higher awareness of reality or the Absolute. It is non-arbitrary, it results from a striving to render something faithfully and fully and in its entire depth. But it is not description. It is not to be judged by correspondence, since the initial dim, implicit sense is quite incommensurable with the articulate expression of insight.

This is the background on which Hegel draws for his conception of the work of art. But there is a crucial difference in the way he develops it from the way it has been developed in the post-Romantic period. Hegel insists on the primacy of clarity, which means ultimately of the descriptive dimension. This in a sense wins through to supremacy in the development of absolute spirit.

If we use the word ‘disclosure’ (following Heidegger) for the bringing to overt expression of what is at first merely intuitive intimation, then we can say that disclosure by itself, no matter how much it heightens awareness, is always surrounded with a horizon of lesser clarity. Perhaps our formulation is clear, or our work imposing, but the question remains, have we rendered the original inspiration faithfully? And to answer this we have to return to the half-light of our original, inarticulate intuition. Even the clarity of descriptive discourse is won initially through achievements of disclosure, in which we win through to a rigorous, adequate descriptive language. The question thus always remains, on its margins as it were, whether the way this language distinguishes and classifies things is really illuminating, whether it does not distort or occlude some important aspect of reality. If we focus on disclosure, we must see all clarity, all explicit, articulate thought, as surrounded by a horizon of the unclear, implicit, inarticulate.

This has been the turn of much contemporary philosophy, including the philosophers I mentioned above – though each would formulate things very differently. For Polanyi or Heidegger, for instance, even a clear descriptive language, in which our most explicit, distinct, unambiguous thoughts may be couched, has, as one way of classifying reality among others, as one among many possible ‘grids’, a host of implications of which we can never be fully aware. And these form the horizon of the unclear, the non-focal, which surrounds our explicit consciousness.

Of course, if we think of consciousness as only and always representative, then this whole dimension of disclosure and the accompanying horizon of the implicit is without meaning. This is the case with much empiricist thought, as with the intellectualist tradition of the Enlightenment. For both of these, descriptive discourse is not an achievement. Attaining clarity about the world involves only overcoming confusion in our representations.

But this was not Hegel’s view. He took the essential notions of expressivist theory and built his philosophy on them. And yet he claimed that philosophy can and must attain to total clarity. This represents an important difference from the whole thrust of contemporary philosophy, which we shall discuss further in Chapter XX.

Hegel allows for the dimension of disclosure. He sees conceptual clarity as an achievement, won through the forging of a more and more adequate descriptive language, and the transposition into the clarity of representative thought of insights originally expressed in non-representative consciousness. Our consciousness of the Absolute is thus first of all obscure, enigmatic. It is a disclosure which is not sure of having rendered faithfully its original inspiration or intuition. But it climbs to the point where it is totally clear, where even the original horizon of unclarity is dissipated. And this it does because the zone of conceptual clarity extends itself and ultimately takes in even the original inarticulate intuition. For this is ultimately seen itself to be conceptually necessary. The Idea as result must grow out of the merely implicit and undeveloped. But this necessary unfolding is itself part of the formula of rational necessity which is the Idea. Hence the inarticulate beginning is itself shown in the end to be deduced from the Idea.

Thus in Hegel’s system even the obscure and inarticulate is ultimately captured in the net of clear conceptual description. In the end description is totally victorious and swallows up the conditions of its own impure birth. The circle of necessity as we saw reaches back to recuperate its starting point. Spirit ultimately encounters only itself. This achievement of total clarity is essential to Hegel’s ontology, and it is this which is finally at issue in the turn of contemporary philosophy, as we shall see in our concluding discussion below.

3
Art, as a form of absolute spirit, goes through its development in history. And here, its finest hour was the age of Greek civilization. For it was in this period when art first came to an adequate presentation of the Idea, while at the same time, no higher representation was yet attainable.

The only adequate sensuous form for the Idea is finally the human, for man is spirit. This the Greeks won through to, and their art is thus the art of the freedom of Spirit perfectly in harmony with its embodiment in man. This is the great period in which the Gods are understood in human form.

Before that men still struggled with a vision of the absolute as something sublime (erhaben) and beyond, something which could not really be given sensuous form. Hence the forms which were used – for instance, animal forms – were used as symbols, to hint at an absolute that could not properly be figured. And since the sense of the incommensurability of symbolic stuff and Idea symbolized was always pressing on them, the artists of pre-Greek religions distorted the forms they used, and created fantastic beings, e.g., half animal, half bird, giants and monsters, and so on, so that we are conscious of the boundlessness, measurelessness (das Maßlose) in the absolute. Hegel speaks of this ‘symbolic art’ as characteristic of oriental religion in general (I – I, 114—17), but what he is mainly thinking of here is Egyptian art. Hegel saw this as a struggle to win through to a vision of Spirit as free, a vision which finally comes triumphandly through with the Greek understanding of God in manlike form, of God thus as free subjectivity, and not simply sublime substantial force. This is the portrayal of Egyptian religion in the discussion in Chapter VII of PhG, But this struggle was a completely unreflecting one. It was a groping towards new art forms, and hence men were unconscious that what they groped towards was a higher vision of the Idea.

Men first win through to a vision of the absolute as free subjectivity, and hence as a reality in which man is at home, in Greek civilization, and this comes in the form of a presentation (Darstellung) of God in human shape. But this vision is won, not by the elaboration of a higher theology, but rather by groping through to an art form which for the first time is adequate to the nature of the absolute as Spirit, as subjectivity. We thus have an ‘art-religion’. Hegel applies this term to Greek religion, not only because it is the first to find an adequate art-representation of the absolute as Spirit, but also because it is the last which relies principally on art. The religions that succeed the Greek will no longer consider art as the paradigm medium of their consciousness of the absolute. This will now be in ‘religion’, that is, theology and myth; art will be accorded only an ancillary role, a secondary illustration of what can only be grasped in spirit, in inward understanding. Indeed, some branches of this higher religious stream – Judaism and Islam – will refuse representational art altogether as idolatrous.

The fact that art-religion comes to its highest fruition with the Greeks is of course not unconnected with the fact that it is here on the verge of supercession. This is the way the Spirit works, as we have seen. And we have already explored some of the inadequacies which make this supercession inevitable. The bringing of the Godly into harmony with the human is achieved at the cost of particularizing it, so that there are many Gods, and the absolute power over all remains behind them in the form of a fate to which even they are subject. On man’s side, his sense of one-ness with the substantial comes through his identification with such a particular visage of the divine. Greek man is parochial. He has not yet attained reflection and universal subjectivity.

The universal reflective subject attains to a higher notion of the one absolute God as united to man, in Christ. But this unity is not immediate, rather it moves through the necessary suppression of the first unity in Christ through Resurrection/Ascension and return in the form of the Holy Ghost which dwells in the community. This dialectical unity cannot be fully manifested adequately in art, unlike the immediate unity of the Godhead with some particular form in Greek polytheism. Hence the absolute religion, Christianity, cannot be an art-religion. Art can have a part here, but it is subordinate to thought – thought, that is, in the general sense where it englobes both conceptual and imaged discourse. The absolute religion has to be inwardly understood in discourse.

Art again becomes symbolic, in the sense that it is once again not adequate to the Idea and knows itself as such. But whereas before it was the only medium which was struggling towards adequacy impelled by a dim inarticulate sense of the boundless, now we have an adequate vision of the absolute as subject in a higher medium than art.

Hence the new art is free as it formerly was not. It is free and can give itself over to the ‘adventures of fantasy’ (Abenteuern der Phantasie, I & I, 123). Since in the modern age, particular subjectivity attains to its full rights, and the absolute lord of all is known to be subjectivity, the actions of particular men win their significance for art. (This is a parallel point to that of the modern age having transcended the need for oracles.) This phase of art since the Christian era Hegel calls ‘Romantic art’.

Thus the Idea shows us how art develops in history according to a necessary pattern. Its necessity can similarly be traced in the different art forms, which have an affinity to different stages. Architecture, being the wielding of the massive in non-figurative form, corresponds to the period of symbolic art. Here it is paramount. But then the preparation of the perfect temple calls forth the representation of the God. This, which comes to its highest point with the Greeks, corresponds to a paramountcy of sculpture.

So now the temple is erected for the God; his house stands ready, external nature has been wrought into shape, and suddenly it is pierced by the lightning bolt of individuality. The God stands there in nature, it exhibits him: the statue rises in the temple.

(I & I, 127)

Painting, music and poetry are more inward, they are not bound in the same way to three-dimensional external existence as their inescapable medium, as are architecture and sculpture. Painting deals in the ‘abstract visible’ (I & I, 131). Music is in sound which is already more ethereal; and poetry in words where sound rises to the spiritual reality of sign. These arts thus become paramount in the period of Romantic art.

Poetry is the highest form, where art is ready to go over into representation. The medium of poetry is language. Now when language ultimately attains to descriptive clarity, its properties as a physical medium cease to be important. It becomes entirely representative in the broad sense used here, that is, its function is only to focus our minds on the objects described and to characterize these correctly. Hence the actual sound or look of the word becomes irrelevant; whether we say ‘chair’ or ‘chaise’ or ‘Stuhl’, or any synonym in one of these or any other language, has no importance. All that matters is the descriptive meaning. The descriptive term becomes ‘simply an indifferent sign without intrinsic worth’ (gänzlich gleichgültiges und wertloses Zeichen, I & I, 133). The sensuous properties of our medium are no longer relevant, and we have transcended the domain of art.2

What can the place of art be in the new era? On one hand, the Romantic or Christian era has liberated fantasy; art can now portray the contingent, the subjective. But this is bound up with the fact that the Idea has found a higher mode of consciousness which art cannot match, religion and ultimately philosophy. So that art ‘has ceased to be the highest need of spirit’ (das höchste Bedürfnis des Geistes, I & I, 153). This applies to the whole modern era. But the situation of art will surely be aggravated when we win through in philosophy to a fully adequate expression of the Idea. Will art assume a secondary role, illustrating truths more clearly known in other media? Will it be to speculative philosophy what Church art was to Christian theology, with this major difference, that this theology never claimed to penetrate the mysteries of God or the Incarnation, and thus left art an endless frontier which the clarity of philosophy threatens to close?

The logic of Hegel’s position seems to open this depressing prospect, on which he does not comment. Certainly this is not what he senses the future of art to be, as one can glean from his aesthetic writings. And here his instinct as a member of the Romantic generation was truer than his reason as a philosopher. For far from taking a second place in the spiritual life of modern man, art has taken over from religion in the lives of many of our contemporaries, in the sense that it is for them the highest expression of what is of ultimate importance, and/or the highest activity of man. And this by itself is an indication of how far we have moved out of the purview of Hegel’s synthesis.

 

 

1 This qualification is necessary, because Kant’s third critique also flirts with another doctrine. Besides the central thesis that the judgement of taste tells us nothing about the world but is based on an accord of our faculties of representation, there appears towards the end of the discussion on aesthetics another view. Thus (§49) spirit (Geist) is defined as the capacity to present ‘aesthetic ideas’, and ‘aesthetic idea’ is explained as ‘a representation of the imagination which gives much food for thought (viel zu denken veranlaßt), without any particular determinate thought, i.e., concept, being adequate to it; which thus no form of words can fully render and make understandable (die folglich keine Sprache völlig erreicht und verständlich machen kann). On this view, great art, art with spirit, would be prized for its depth of vision which goes beyond what words could express. These two doctrines can be made compatible, but the result is quite different from what Kant’s central thesis is usually thought to be, and closer to Hegel.

2 What is why it seems strange that Hegel appears to attribute this transcendence of the sensuous medium to poetry, a view which is hard to credit not only in itself, but also in terms of Hegel’s own theory. Cf. I & I, 133. It must be remembered that these are lecture notes, never prepared for publication by Hegel’s own hand.

 
    