## CHAPTER VIII
## The Phenomenology as Interpretive Dialectic
 

 

1
Absolute knowledge can be seen as the combination of our two highest stages. It is the final unity of subject and world, or from another point of view, of finite subject and infinite subject, or of absolute substance and subjectivity. But this union is there implicitly (an sich) as religion; whereas the moral consciousness which was the highest stage of the chapter on Spirit contained explicitly (für sich) the notion that the subject’s will is at one with the universal.

The result is a unity of the self and the essence or substance of things; which unity as always can be seen as a convergence from each direction; the self is lifted up to essence by seeing itself as the vehicle of Geist; but the essence or substance ‘comes down’ to the self in a sense in coming to grasp itself as subject (and therefore needing a finite subject as its vehicle).

When this comes to full consciousness it yields a form of knowledge, which Hegel calls absolute knowledge. What is this? It cannot be expressed in one proposition, for it is simply a grasp of the true nature of things, and this can only be expressed dialectically. Absolute knowledge is the full understanding that substance must become subject, that subject must go beyond itself, become divided, be over against itself as object, in order to return to unity with itself.

Absolute knowledge, one might then be tempted to say, is simply the whole content of the PhG; the last chapter has meaning only as a recapitulation of the rest. This is partly true, and we shall see more of this in a minute; but it is only partly so. In fact the insight of absolute knowledge can also be put in a quite different way to that we have followed in the PhG. Here the drama has been the split between subject and object, between consciousness and self-consciousness, certainty of self and truth. This is finally overcome at the end of the work.

But we can also present our ascent to the final unity in difference not as a struggle of different forms of consciousness but as a derivation in terms of those basic categorial concepts with which we try to express this ultimate unity in opposition: being, substance, subject, thought, and so on. If we are right, and if each of these can only be understood ultimately in relation to the others, then this should be verifiable by an examination of these concepts themselves.

And this, of course, is what the Logic will attempt. In this sense the PhG can be seen as a kind of introduction to the Logic. We will start examining these categorial concepts, starting with ‘being’, and we shall see that each refers us beyond itself to others, until finally they form a system which expresses the unity in opposition of Geist with its world. This system is called the Idea. Hegel announces this (562) in these terms: we will no longer be studying the drama of separation and unity of subject and world; rather we will be taking as our subject concepts, which are already unities of being and self; and just because it contains self and hence negativity in it, each particular concept suffers an ‘unrest which pushes it to self-annulment’ (seine Unruhe, sich selbst aufzuheben). This pure science will then follow the inner movement of these concepts as they go over into the Idea. As always, science will not be expressible in a single proposition, but only in a self-developing system; but it will here be presented in a different medium from the one we have been moving in in the PhG. Geist will be moving ‘in this ether of its life’ (562), i.e., among concepts which are its own medium.

But this Logic cannot be the whole of science. The basic intuition of Geist entails that it must be exteriorized in Nature, hence there must be external, physical, extended reality. And also this Geist must return to itself out of this alienation; and this return presupposes another exteriorization, that of time. Moreover this return to self in time, which means through a set of stages which are external to each other in coming one after the other and which are real forms of collective life in history, is itself a precondition of the pure science being achieved; this pure science is the inner prise de conscience of Geist of its return to itself.

But then this self-consciousness of Geist must be more than the pure science of concepts. Geist is returning out of alienation in nature through a series of historical stages. In order to complete this return, he must grasp himself in nature and history. And this means that he must see the inner necessity of nature and history; see the necessity underlying the forms of exteriority and hence reciprocal contingency which are space and time.

Time is the Concept itself which has determinate existence [der da ist], and presents itself to consciousness as empty intuition; thus Spirit must necessarily appear in time, and it continues to appear in time as long as it does not seize its pure concept, that is, as long as it does not abolish time.

(PhG, 558)

Geist’s self-knowledge must therefore include this grasp of the inner necessity of nature and history. As always, his final self-knowledge cannot be separated from the way he has followed there; but now the stages of history are interiorized in remembrance.1 Thus interiorized, nature and history are freed of the form of external contingency, extension and time. And the result, history grasped in concept (die begriffene Geschichte, 564), is the inner reality of absolute spirit. It is on this note, with an (altered) quote from Schiller that the PhG ends.

2
How does the PhG hold together as an ascending dialectic? Looking back over the extraordinary variety and richness of the figures studied, it is hard to see the uniting thread of argument. And in fact the PhG is more impressive and persuasive as interpretation of certain passages of political and religious history than it is as argument.

In order to see why this is so in spite of Hegel’s intentions, we should look again at the nature of his dialectical arguments. At the outset of the chapter, we distinguished two types of dialectic, the ontological and the historical.

The first starts from the basis that a certain standard, which we identify only by certain criterial properties, is fulfilled, and moves through different conceptions of this standard to more and more adequate forms. We saw an example of this in the first part of the PhG, on consciousness. We start from the basis that there is knowledge, and that knowledge is an achievement. What we do not know, if we can put it this way, is what is involved in meeting the standard. Or rather, all we know about this is certain very sketchy critical properties. Thus we start with the simple but intuitively persuasive idea that knowledge is receiving data, and that the standard to be met is that of maximum openness and receptivity. This is the idea behind sensible certainty. When this involves us in a contradiction, we alter our conception of what knowledge is. This starts a second phase of the dialectic; and so on. The key to dialectical movement here is that since we know that the standard is met, we can conclude that any conception of it which shows itself unrealizable must be wrong.

The historical dialectic, on the other hand, starts from the thesis that a certain purpose is sought after, even though it is not yet realized. Here the clash between purpose and effective reality leads not to our redefining the purpose, but to the breaking up of the reality concerned and its replacement by a more adequate one (although of course this requires a redefinition of purpose on the part of the effective agents in history). This is the kind of development we saw in the section on self-consciousness, for instance in the dialectic of the master and the slave, which predominated in the chapter on Reason, and made up the whole movement of the chapters on Spirit and Religion. Certain historical forms of life are shown to be prey to inner contradiction because they are defeating the purpose for which they exist. The master-slave relation frustrates the purpose of recognition for which it was entered into. The city state fails as a realization of the universal, because its parochial nature contradicts true universality. The revolutionary state destroys freedom because it tries to realize it in absolute form, by dissolving all the articulations of society, without which freedom cannot exist.

Now this distinction is of more than taxonomical interest. For there is an important difference in the grounding of Hegel’s dialectical arguments which is interwoven with it. We saw in the first section that the starting point of a dialectical argument must impose itself, as it were, that the conception of the thing concerned as the realization of a purpose must be inescapable. Otherwise the conclusions of the argument are merely hypothetically valid.

Now we saw how Hegel succeeded in the ontological dialectic of consciousness in getting such an unquestionable starting point, since it is hard to resist the view that knowledge is an achievement and involves the fulfilment of a standard. We shall see in the next chapter how he hopes to find a similarly unquestionable starting point for the Logic as a science of categories. But historical dialectics pose a much more difficult problem. They involve our imputing a certain purpose or purposes to men in history, or to Geist through men in history; and how can any such imputation be undeniable?

Thus we saw how the dialectic of the master and the slave starts with the imputation of the drive for recognition. This is what powers the fight to the death, and this is what in turn makes this outcome unsatisfactory and requires that both protagonists survive in the relation of master-slave. This relation in turn is shown to be inadequate in the light of the same purpose. But what justifies us in imputing this purpose in the first place?

If we look at Hegel’s most successful historical dialectics, the ones which are the most illuminating and convincing, we find that in fact they convince the way any good historical account does, because they ‘fit’ well as an interpretation.2

This is, what we know about a given period can be made sense of, can be made to cohere without implausibility on this account, o in any case with less implausibility than other rival explanations. But the point about these interpretive explanations is that they have no absolutely certain starting point. The original imputation of a certain purpose to the actors, or a certain bent to events, or a certain logic of the situation is quite ungrounded on its own. It is only when it has been followed out, and connected with all the other imputations which go with it, and when these have been seen to fit the facts with plausibility, and to make over-all sense, that we feel confident about accepting it.

Thus Hegel’s account of the breakdown of the Greek city state turns on the underlying purpose of realizing a consciousness and way of life which is universal. The polis both fulfils this purpose and at the same time frustrates it because of its parochial nature. But what will convince us to accept this imputation of purpose to man (or Geist) as the mainspring of events? Only the sense which it enables us to make of the events of the period, the way it relates the vogue of the sophists, the development of Greek literature and culture, changes in Greek religion, the decay of the city state, and so on, into a whole which is both plausible and makes sense of what happened. The enduring interest of many of Hegel’s historical interpretations lies just in the fact that they do illuminate the interconnection of events enough to induce us to take them seriously, even if we have to transpose them (as most notoriously Marx did). But the imputation of purpose can never be self-authenticating as a starting point.

This problem besets Hegel’s historical dialectic in general. The ontological ones start with a realized goal or standard. The initial task is to show that the object in question is to be understood in terms of the realization of a goal. Once this is secured, the dialectic can proceed to define the goal. Since we know that the standard is met, we can set aside any conception of the goal which shows itself to be unrealizable. We can start with any definition, and, by showing how it conflicts with its own fulfilment, move to more adequate conceptions until we reach the fully adequate one. Or to put the point another way, from the nature of the object under study we know certain of its criterial properties. We have only to learn what more exact specification of the purpose will in fact exhibit these properties.

But this cannot be the case with our historical dialectics. Prior to the total unfolding of history we have ex hypothesi no realized purpose before us. So we cannot treat any tract of history as a fulfilment whose operative standard we have to discover. Nor can we read from any tract of history with certainty even a general description of what man is ultimately aiming at. We cannot be sure of having gleaned even some criterial properties of man’s ultimate fulfilment.

Thus it seems that just as we distinguished between ontological and historical dialectics as two kinds of dialectical development, so we have to distinguish two ways in which a dialectical exposition can command our assent. There are strict dialectics, whose starting point is or can reasonably claim to be undeniable. And then there are interpretive or hermeneutical dialectics, which convince us by the overall plausibility of the interpretation they give. It would seem that while Hegel has some candidates for the first category – most notably, as we shall see, the Logic – his historical dialectics fall in the second category. They do not convince by strict argument, but by the plausibility of their interpretation.

What would Hegel say to this? Would he admit a distinction of this kind? Certainly not in the form presented here. And Hegel would never have agreed that any part of his system reposed on plausible interpretations as against strict argument, for this would be to abandon the conception of Geist as total rationality. But in another form, I believe the distinction does find a place in Hegel’s system. Leaving aside the PhG for the moment, the final system of the Encyclopaedia starts with a strict dialectic, the Logic. This establishes that there is no independent finite being, but that all is held together in the Idea, the formula of rational necessity which creates its own external manifestation. This conclusion is then available for the succeeding dialectics of the philosophies of nature and spirit. And Hegel does in fact draw on it in these dialectics.

Hence we could say that for Hegel, certainty about the purposes of history, which could not be drawn in any form from its earliest periods, and which could only be gleaned with greater or lesser plausibility from the entire drama, can nevertheless be gained even for our examination of its beginnings, because these purposes are established previously by a strict dialectic. They are thus available as certain starting points for our understanding of history, and the ensuing dialectic can be said to flow with absolute certainty.

Thus in his introductory lectures to the philosophy of history, Hegel speaks of the principles ‘that Reason rules the world’ (VG, 28) and that the final purpose of the world is the actualization of freedom (ibid., 63), as having to be presupposed in the study of history, but as having been ‘proved in philosophy’ (VG, 28). It is clear that Hegel is referring here to the Logic, since the theses which are deemed to be proved concern the Idea, the culminating concept of this work. Its results are thus an ‘input’ into the philosophy of history. They are the presuppositions which enable it to begin.

But immediately after this passage, Hegel says of the belief that there is Reason in history that ‘It is not simply a presupposition of study; it is a result which happens to be known to myself because I already know the whole. Therefore, only the study of world history itself can show that it has proceeded rationally, that it represents the rationally necessary course of the World Spirit’ (VG, 30).3 And he goes on ‘History itself must be taken as it is; we have to proceed historically, empirically.’

This passage implies that there is another way of showing that Reason is at work in history than the strict conceptual proof of the Logic. And this is by examining the whole of history, ‘as it is…empirically’. Is this perhaps a partial recognition that there are two different kinds of proof of a thesis, one a strict proof which builds from an undeniable starting point, and the other an ‘empirical’ one which draws it from an examination of the whole as the only conclusion which makes sense of this whole?4

The strict philosophical proof would then be a presupposition for the study of history in this sense, that it makes us look at history with the eye of reason. And this is necessary, because in order to know what is substantial in history

one must bring to it the consciousness of reason, no mere physical eye or finite understanding, but the eye of the Concept, of reason, which presses through the surface and struggles through and beyond the manifold, motley tumult of events, (die Mannigfaltigkeit des bunten Gewühls der Begebenheiten, VG, 32).

But once we look at it in this way, we have a coherence, a convincing explanation of history’s course, which provides independent proof of the thesis that Reason rules the world.

If I am right that Hegel draws on the conclusions of the Logic for the dialectics which come ‘after’ it in the system, then we still have to distinguish in his work between dialectical arguments that are self-authenticating and stand on their own, because they start from an undeniable beginning; and those which are dependent on others, which have to make use of the conclusions of others to authenticate their readings. What we have called ‘strict’ dialectics would be self-authenticating in this sense, and what we have called ‘interpretive’ would be dependent. And what we have called ‘historical’ dialectics, (as well as the philosophy of nature) would fall into the dependent category.

What does this tell us about the argument of the PhG? The greater part of the book is taken up with historical dialectics, hence arguments which are not self-authenticating. But, in fact, these only start after the strict dialectic with which the work opens, that of consciousness. The dialectic of self-consciousness, with its underlying notions of life, human self-consciousness and the desire for recognition, builds supposedly on the results of the first part. In this respect the PhG resembles the system laid out in the Encyclopaedia.

But when we look at it in this light, we can see that the first three chapters are much too weak and sketchy to support the rich superstructure of historical and anthropological interpretation that Hegel has erected. It is these interpretations, of course, which persuade, which give the work its power and fascination as a statement of Hegel’s vision. But as strict argument, its success must turn in the first place on the solidity of the first chain of arguments, whereby consciousness turns into self-consciousness, that is, whereby our perception of a world, which seems at first other, turns into knowledge of self. Or as Hegel puts it

Consciousness of another, of an object in general, is in fact necessarily self-consciousness, reflectedness in self, consciousness of oneself in one’s other-being. (PhG, 128, italics in original.)

But as I indicated in the second section, the argument here does not really measure up, if indeed, any argument can. Nor is this surprising. If it is possible at all to establish Hegel’s central contention that the world of things only exists as an emanation of Geist, and therefore that spirit knows itself in knowing it, then surely the argument which does this will be a long and difficult one, and will marshall an encyclopaedic set of considerations. The mature Hegel probably thought so. That is why the work which stands as the foundational strict dialectic of the final system is in fact long and difficult.

The Logic is in fact, once we set aside the PhG, the only strict, self-authenticating dialectic of Hegel’s system. That is why it has to be presupposed in the philosophies of nature and spirit. On it the claim of Hegel to have grounded his vision in strict argument stands or falls. Small wonder that he devoted the attention to it that he did. Let us now turn to examine it.

 

 

1 The German word ‘Erinnerung’ (recollection) permits Hegel this play on words which for him is very significant.

2 I am here of course taking sides in the debate about explanation in history, for an interpretive view and against the ‘covering law’ model. For brevity’s sake, I cannot undertake to argue my position here although I have tried to argue something like it in my ‘Interpretation and the Sciences of Man’, Review of Metaphysics, XXXV 3–51, #1, Sept. 1971. But the same point about Hegel’s historical account could probably be made from the other perspective as well.

3 Reason in History, translated by Robert Hartmann, New York, 1953, p. 30. I have slightly amended the translation.

4 This is perhaps what was meant in the sentence in the introduction of the philosophy of history (VG, 29), which says that the presence of reason in world history is a truth which has its ‘proper proof [eigentlicher Beweis] in the knowledge of reason itself’, whereas ‘world history only gives a convincing exposition of it’ (in der Weltgeschichte erweist sie sich nur). But we cannot build too much on this passage. It is drawn not from Hegel’s own notes, but from those taken by hearers at his lectures.

 
    